Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 1 


Addresses at The Parliament of Religions 

Karma-Yoga 

Raja-Yoga 

Lectures and Discourses 







Swami Vivekananda 
January 12,1863- July 4,1902 



Chicago 1893 


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 


Volume 1 

Addresses at The Parliament of Religions 

Response to Welcome 

Why We Disagree 

Paper on Hinduism 

Religion not the Crying Need of India 

Buddhism, the Fulfilment of Hinduism 

Address at the Final Session 










Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

RESPONSE TO WELCOME 

At the World's Parliament of Religions, Chicago 
11th September, 1893 

Sisters and Brothers of America, 

It fills my heart with joy unspeakable to rise in response to the warm and 
cordial welcome which you have given us. I thank you in the name of the most 
ancient order of monks in the world; I thank you in the name of the mother of 
religions; and I thank you in the name of millions and millions of Hindu people 
of all classes and sects. 

My thanks, also, to some of the speakers on this platform who, referring to the 
delegates from the Orient, have told you that these men from far-off nations 
may well claim the honour of bearing to different lands the idea of toleration. I 
am proud to belong to a religion which has taught the world both tolerance and 
universal acceptance. We believe not only in universal toleration, but we accept 
all religions as true. I am proud to belong to a nation which has sheltered the 
persecuted and the refugees of all religions and all nations of the earth. I am 
proud to tell you that we have gathered in our bosom the purest remnant of the 
Israelites, who came to Southern India and took refuge with us in the very year 
in which their holy temple was shattered to pieces by Roman tyranny. I am 
proud to belong to the religion which has sheltered and is still fostering the 
remnant of the grand Zoroastrian nation. I will quote to you, brethren, a few 
lines from a hymn which I remember to have repeated from my earliest 
boyhood, which is every day repeated by millions of human beings: 'As the 
different streams having their sources in different places all mingle their water 
in the sea, so, O Lord, the different paths which men take through different 
tendencies, various though they appear, crooked or straight, all lead to TheeC 

The present convention, which is one of the most august assemblies ever held, 
is in itself a vindication, a declaration to the world of the wonderful doctrine 
preached in the GiiwCWhosoever comes to Me, through whatsoever form, 1 






reach him; all men are struggling through paths which in the end lead to me'' 
Sectarianism, bigotry, and its horrible descendant, fanaticism, have long 
possessed this beautiful earth. They have filled the earth with violence, 
drenched it often and often with human blood, destroyed civilisation and sent 
whole nations to despair. Had it not been for these horrible demons, human 
society would be far more advanced than it is now. But their time is come; and 
I fervently hope that the bell that tolled this morning in honour of this 
convention may be the death-knell of all fanaticism, of all persecutions with the 
sword or with the pen, and of all uncharitable feelings between persons 
wending their way to the same goal. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

WHY WE DISAGREE 

15th September, 1893 

I will tell you a little story. You have heard the eloquent speaker who has just 
finished say, "Let us cease from abusing each other," and he was very sorry 
that there should be always so much variance. 

But I think I should tell you a story which would illustrate the cause of this 
variance. A frog lived in a well. It had lived there for a long time. It was born 
there and brought up there, and yet was a little, small frog. Of course the 
evolutionists were not there then to tell us whether the frog lost its eyes or not, 
but, for our story's sake, we must take it for granted that it had its eyes, and that 
it every day cleansed the water of all the worms and bacilli that lived in it with 
an energy that would do credit to our modern bacteriologists. In this way it 
went on and became a little sleek and fat. Well, one day another frog that lived 
in the sea came and fell into the well. 

"Where are you from?" 

"I am from the sea." 

"The sea! How big is that? Is it as big as my well?" and he took a leap from one 
side of the well to the other. 

"My friend," said the frog of the sea, "how do you compare the sea with your 
little well?” 

Then the frog took another leap and asked, "Is your sea so big?" 

"What nonsense you speak, to compare the sea with your well!" 

"Well, then," said the frog of the well, "nothing can be bigger than my well; 
there can be nothing bigger than this; this fellow is a liar, so turn him out." 






That has been the difficulty all the while. 

I am a Hindu. I am sitting in my own little well and thinking that the whole 
world is my little well. The Christian sits in his little well and thinks the whole 
world is his well. The Mohammedan sits in his little well and thinks that is the 
whole world. I have to thank you of America for the great attempt you are 
making to break down the barriers of this little world of ours, and hope that, in 
the future, the Lord will help you to accomplish your purpose. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

PAPER ON HINDUISM 

Read at the Parliament on 19th September, 1893 

Three religions now stand in the world which have come down to us from time 
prehistoric — Hinduism, Zoroastrianism and Judaism. They have all received 
tremendous shocks and all of them prove by their survival their internal 
strength. But while Judaism failed to absorb Christianity and was driven out of 
its place of birth by its all-conquering daughter, and a handful of Parsees is all 
that remains to tell the tale of their grand religion, sect after sect arose in India 
and seemed to shake the religion of the Vedas to its very foundations, but like 
the waters of the seashore in a tremendous earthquake it receded only for a 
while, only to return in an all-absorbing flood, a thousand times more vigorous, 
and when the tumult of the rush was over, these sects were all sucked in, 
absorbed, and assimilated into the immense body of the mother faith. 

From the high spiritual flights of the Vedanta philosophy, of which the latest 
discoveries of science seem like echoes, to the low ideas of idolatry with its 
multifarious mythology, the agnosticism of the Buddhists, and the atheism of 
the Jains, each and all have a place in the Hindu's religion. 

Where then, the question arises, where is the common centre to which all these 
widely diverging radii converge? Where is the common basis upon which all 
these seemingly hopeless contradictions rest? And this is the question I shall 
attempt to answer. 

The Hindus have received their religion through revelation, the Vedas. They 
hold that the Vedas are without beginning and without end. It may sound 
ludicrous to this audience, how a book can be without beginning or end. But by 
the Vedas no books are meant. They mean the accumulated treasury of 
spiritual laws discovered by different persons in different times. Just as the law 
of gravitation existed before its discovery, and would exist if all humanity 
forgot it, so is it with the laws that govern the spiritual world. The moral, 
ethical, and spiritual relations between soul and soul and between individual 







spirits and the Father of all spirits, were there before their discovery, and would 
remain even if we forgot them. 

The discoverers of these laws are called Rishis, and we honour them as 
perfected beings. I am glad to tell this audience that some of the very greatest 
of them were women. Here it may be said that these laws as laws may be 
without end, but they must have had a beginning. The Vedas teach us that 
creation is without beginning or end. Science is said to have proved that the 
sum total of cosmic energy is always the same. Then, if there was a time when 
nothing existed, where was all this manifested energy? Some say it was in a 
potential form in God. In that case God is sometimes potential and sometimes 
kinetic, which would make Him mutable. Everything mutable is a compound, 
and everything compound must undergo that change which is called 
destruction. So God would die, which is absurd. Therefore there never was a 
time when there was no creation. 

If I may be allowed to use a simile, creation and creator are two lines, without 
beginning and without end, running parallel to each other. God is the ever 
active providence, by whose power systems after systems are being evolved out 
of chaos, made to run for a time and again destroyed. This is what the Brahmin 
boy repeats every day: "'The sun and the moon, the Lord created like the suns 
and moons of previous cycles."' And this agrees with modern science. 

Here I stand and if I shut my eyes, and try to conceive my existence, "I", "I", 

"I", what is the idea before me? The idea of a body. Am I, then, nothing but 
a combination of material substances? The Vedas declare, “No”. I am a spirit 
living in a body. I am not the body. The body will die, but I shall not die. Here 
am I in this body; it will fall, but I shall go on living. I had also a past. The soul 
was not created, for creation means a combination which means a certain future 
dissolution. If then the soul was created, it must die. Some are born happy, 
enjoy perfect health, with beautiful body, mental vigour and all wants supplied. 
Others are born miserable, some are without hands or feet, others again are 
idiots and only drag on a wretched existence. Why, if they are all created, why 
does a just and merciful God create one happy and another unhappy, why is He 
so partial ? Nor would it mend matters in the least to hold that those who are 
miserable in this life will be happy in a future one. Why should a man be 


miserable even here in the reign of a just and merciful God? 


In the second place, the idea of a creator God does not explain the anomaly, but 
simply expresses the cruel fiat of an all-powerful being. There must have been 
causes, then, before his birth, to make a man miserable or happy and those 
were his past actions. 

Are not all the tendencies of the mind and the body accounted for by inherited 
aptitude? Here are two parallel lines of existence — one of the mind, the other 
of matter. If matter and its transformations answer for all that we have, there is 
no necessity for supposing the existence of a soul. But it cannot be proved that 
thought has been evolved out of matter, and if a philosophical monism is 
inevitable, spiritual monism is certainly logical and no less desirable than a 
materialistic monism; but neither of these is necessary here. 

We cannot deny that bodies acquire certain tendencies from heredity, but those 
tendencies only mean the physical configuration, through which a peculiar 
mind alone can act in a peculiar way. There are other tendencies peculiar to a 
soul caused by its past actions. And a soul with a certain tendency would by the 
laws of affinity take birth in a body which is the fittest instrument for the 
display of that tendency. This is in accord with science, for science wants to 
explain everything by habit, and habit is got through repetitions. So repetitions 
are necessary to explain the natural habits of a new-born soul. And since they 
were not obtained in this present life, they must have come down from past 
lives. 

There is another suggestion. Taking all these for granted, how is it that I do not 
remember anything of my past life ? This can be easily explained. I am now 
speaking English. It is not my mother tongue, in fact no words of my mother 
tongue are now present in my consciousness; but let me try to bring them up, 
and they rush in. That shows that consciousness is only the surface of the 
mental ocean, and within its depths are stored up all our experiences. Try and 
struggle, they would come up and you would be conscious even of your past 
life. 

This is direct and demonstrative evidence. Verification is the perfect proof of a 



theory, and here is the challenge thrown to the world by the Rishis. We have 
discovered the secret by which the very depths of the ocean of memory can be 
stirred up — try it and you would get a complete reminiscence of your past life. 

So then the Hindu believes that he is a spirit. Him the sword cannot pierce — 
him the fire cannot burn — him the water cannot melt — him the air cannot 
dry. The Hindu believes that every soul is a circle whose circumference is 
nowhere, but whose centre is located in the body, and that death means the 
change of this centre from body to body. Nor is the soul bound by the 
conditions of matter. In its very essence it is free, unbounded, holy, pure, and 
perfect. But somehow or other it finds itself tied down to matter, and thinks of 
itself as matter. 

Why should the free, perfect, and pure being be thus under the thraldom of 
matter, is the next question. How can the perfect soul be deluded into the belief 
that it is imperfect? We have been told that the Hindus shirk the question and 
say that no such question can be there. Some thinkers want to answer it by 
positing one or more quasi-perfect beings, and use big scientific names to fill 
up the gap. But naming is not explaining. The question remains the same. How 
can the perfect become the quasi-perfect; how can the pure, the absolute, 
change even a microscopic particle of its nature? But the Hindu is sincere. He 
does not want to take shelter under sophistry. He is brave enough to face the 
question in a manly fashion; and his answer is: “I do not know. I do not know 
how the perfect being, the soul, came to think of itself as imperfect, as joined to 
and conditioned by matter." But the fact is a fact for all that. It is a fact in 
everybody's consciousness that one thinks of oneself as the body. The Hindu 
does not attempt to explain why one thinks one is the body. The answer that it 
is the will of God is no explanation. This is nothing more than what the Hindu 
says, "I do not know." 

Well, then, the human soul is eternal and immortal, perfect and infinite, and 
death means only a change of centre from one body to another. The present is 
determined by our past actions, and the future by the present. The soul will go 
on evolving up or reverting back from birth to birth and death to death. But 
here is another question: Is man a tiny boat in a tempest, raised one moment on 
the foamy crest of a billow and dashed down into a yawning chasm the next. 






rolling to and fro at the mercy of good and bad actions — a powerless, helpless 
wreck in an ever-raging, ever-rushing, uncompromising current of cause and 
effect; a little moth placed under the wheel of causation which rolls on crushing 
everything in its way and waits not for the widow's tears or the orphan's cry? 
The heart sinks at the idea, yet this is the law of Nature. Is there no hope? Is 
there no escape? — was the cry that went up from the bottom of the heart of 
despair. It reached the throne of mercy, and words of hope and consolation 
came down and inspired a Vedic sage, and he stood up before the world and in 
trumpet voice proclaimed the glad tidings: "Hear, ye children of immortal 
bliss! even ye that reside in higher spheres! I have found the Ancient One who 
is beyond all darkness, all delusion: knowing Him alone you shall be saved 
from death over again." "Children of immortal bliss" — what a sweet, what a 
hopeful name! Allow me to call you, brethren, by that sweet name — heirs of 
immortal bliss — yea, the Hindu refuses to call you sinners. Ye are the 
Children of God, the sharers of immortal bliss, holy and perfect beings. Ye 
divinities on earth — sinners! It is a sin to call a man so; it is a standing libel on 
human nature. Come up, O lions, and shake off the delusion that you are sheep; 
you are souls immortal, spirits free, blest and eternal; ye are not matter, ye are 
not bodies; matter is your servant, not you the servant of matter. 

Thus it is that the Vedas proclaim not a dreadful combination of unforgiving 
laws, not an endless prison of cause and effect, but that at the head of all these 
laws, in and through every particle of matter and force, stands One "by whose 
command the wind blows, the fire burns, the clouds rain, and death stalks upon 
the earth." 

And what is His nature? 

He is everywhere, the pure and formless One, the Almighty and the All- 
merciful. "Thou art our father. Thou art our mother. Thou art our beloved 
friend. Thou art the source of all strength; give us strength. Thou art He that 
beareth the burdens of the universe; help me bear the little burden of this life." 
Thus sang the Rishis of the Vedas. And how to worship Him? Through love. 
"He is to be worshipped as the one beloved, dearer than everything in this and 
the next life." 





This is the doctrine of love declared in the Vedas, and let us see how it is fully 
developed and taught by Krishna, whom the Hindus believe to have been God 
incarnate on earth. 

He taught that a man ought to live in this world like a lotus leaf, which grows 
in water but is never moistened by water; so a man ought to live in the world 
— his heart to God and his hands to work. 

It is good to love God for hope of reward in this or the next world, but it is 
better to love God for love's sake, and the prayer goes: "Lord, I do not want 
wealth, nor children, nor learning. If it be Thy will, I shall go from birth to 
birth, but grant me this, that I may love Thee without the hope of reward — 
love unselfishly for love's sake." One of the disciples of Krishna, the then 
Emperor of India, was driven from his kingdom by his enemies and had to take 
shelter with his queen in a forest in the Himalayas, and there one day the queen 
asked him how it was that he, the most virtuous of men, should suffer so much 
misery. Yudhishthira answered, "Behold, my queen, the Himalayas, how grand 
and beautiful they are; I love them. They do not give me anything, but my 
nature is to love the grand, the beautiful, therefore I love them. Similarly, I love 
the Lord. He is the source of all beauty, of all sublimity. He is the only object 
to be loved; my nature is to love Him, and therefore I love. I do not pray for 
anything; I do not ask for anything. Let Him place me wherever He likes. I 
must love Him for love's sake. I cannot trade in love." 

The Vedas teach that the soul is divine, only held in the bondage of matter; 
perfection will be reached when this bond will burst, and the word they use for 
it is therefore, Mukti — freedom, freedom from the bonds of imperfection, 
freedom from death and misery. 

And this bondage can only fall off through the mercy of God, and this mercy 
comes on the pure. So purity is the condition of His mercy. How does that 
mercy act? He reveals Himself to the pure heart; the pure and the stainless see 
God, yea, even in this life; then and then only all the crookedness of the heart is 
made straight. Then all doubt ceases. He is no more the freak of a terrible law 
of causation. This is the very centre, the very vital conception of Hinduism. 

The Hindu does not want to live upon words and theories. If there are 




existences beyond the ordinary sensuous existence, he wants to come face to 
face with them. If there is a soul in him which is not matter, if there is an all- 
merciful universal Soul, he will go to Him direct. He must see Him, and that 
alone can destroy all doubts. So the best proof a Hindu sage gives about the 
soul, about God, is: "I have seen the soul; I have seen God." And that is the 
only condition of perfection. The Hindu religion does not consist in struggles 
and attempts to believe a certain doctrine or dogma, but in realising — not in 
believing, but in being and becoming. 

Thus the whole object of their system is by constant struggle to become perfect, 
to become divine, to reach God and see God, and this reaching God, seeing 
God, becoming perfect even as the Father in Heaven is perfect, constitutes the 
religion of the Hindus. 

And what becomes of a man when he attains perfection? He lives a life of bliss 
infinite. He enjoys infinite and perfect bliss, having obtained the only thing in 
which man ought to have pleasure, namely God, and enjoys the bliss with God. 

So far all the Hindus are agreed. This is the common religion of all the sects of 
India; but, then, perfection is absolute, and the absolute cannot be two or three. 
It cannot have any qualities. It cannot be an individual. And so when a soul 
becomes perfect and absolute, it must become one with Brahman, and it would 
only realise the Lord as the perfection, the reality, of its own nature and 
existence, the existence absolute, knowledge absolute, and bliss absolute. We 
have often and often read this called the losing of individuality and becoming a 
stock or a stone. 

“He jests at scars that never felt a wound.” 

I tell you it is nothing of the kind. If it is happiness to enjoy the consciousness 
of this small body, it must be greater happiness to enjoy the consciousness of 
two bodies, the measure of happiness increasing with the consciousness of an 
increasing number of bodies, the aim, the ultimate of happiness being reached 
when it would become a universal consciousness. 

Therefore, to gain this infinite universal individuality, this miserable little 
prison-individuality must go. Then alone can death cease when I am alone with 



life, then alone can misery cease when I am one with happiness itself, then 
alone can all errors cease when I am one with knowledge itself; and this is the 
necessary scientific conclusion. Science has proved to me that physical 
individuality is a delusion, that really my body is one little continuously 
changing body in an unbroken ocean of matter; and Advaita (unity) is the 
necessary conclusion with my other counterpart, soul. 

Science is nothing but the finding of unity. As soon as science would reach 
perfect unity, it would stop from further progress, because it would reach the 
goal. Thus Chemistry could not progress farther when it would discover one 
element out of which all other could be made. Physics would stop when it 
would be able to fulfill its services in discovering one energy of which all 
others are but manifestations, and the science of religion become perfect when 
it would discover Him who is the one life in a universe of death. Him who is 
the constant basis of an ever-changing world. One who is the only Soul of 
which all souls are but delusive manifestations. Thus is it, through multiplicity 
and duality, that the ultimate unity is reached. Religion can go no farther. This 
is the goal of all science. 

All science is bound to come to this conclusion in the long run. Manifestation, 
and not creation, is the word of science today, and the Hindu is only glad that 
what he has been cherishing in his bosom for ages is going to be taught in more 
forcible language, and with further light from the latest conclusions of science. 

Descend we now from the aspirations of philosophy to the religion of the 
ignorant. At the very outset, I may tell you that there is no polytheism in India. 
In every temple, if one stands by and listens, one will find the worshippers 
applying all the attributes of God, including omnipresence, to the images. It is 
not polytheism, nor would the name henotheism explain the situation. "The 
rose called by any other name would smell as sweet." Names are not 
explanations. 

I remember, as a boy, hearing a Christian missionary preach to a crowd in 
India. Among other sweet things he was telling them was that if he gave a blow 
to their idol with his stick, what could it do? One of his hearers sharply 
answered, "If I abuse your God, what can He do?" “You would be punished,” 


said the preacher, "when you die." "So my idol will punish you when you die," 
retorted the Hindu. 

The tree is known by its fruits. When I have seen amongst them that are called 
idolaters, men, the like of whom in morality and spirituality and love I have 
never seen anywhere, I stop and ask myself, "Can sin beget holiness?" 

Superstition is a great enemy of man, but bigotry is worse. Why does a 
Christian go to church? Why is the cross holy? Why is the face turned toward 
the sky in prayer? Why are there so many images in the Catholic Church? Why 
are there so many images in the minds of Protestants when they pray? My 
brethren, we can no more think about anything without a mental image than we 
can live without breathing. By the law of association, the material image calls 
up the mental idea and vice versa. This is why the Hindu uses an external 
symbol when he worships. He will tell you, it helps to keep his mind fixed on 
the Being to whom he prays. He knows as well as you do that the image is not 
God, is not omnipresent. After all, how much does omnipresence mean to 
almost the whole world? It stands merely as a word, a symbol. Has God 
superficial area? If not, when we repeat that word "omnipresent", we think of 
the extended sky or of space, that is all. 

As we find that somehow or other, by the laws of our mental constitution, we 
have to associate our ideas of infinity with the image of the blue sky, or of the 
sea, so we naturally connect our idea of holiness with the image of a church, a 
mosque, or a cross. The Hindus have associated the idea of holiness, purity, 
truth, omnipresence, and such other ideas with different images and forms. But 
with this difference that while some people devote their whole lives to their 
idol of a church and never rise higher, because with them religion means an 
intellectual assent to certain doctrines and doing good to their fellows, the 
whole religion of the Hindu is centred in realisation. Man is to become divine 
by realising the divine. Idols or temples or churches or books are only the 
supports, the helps, of his spiritual childhood: but on and on he must progress. 

He must not stop anywhere. "'External worship, material worship, " say the 
scriptures, "is the lowest stage; struggling to rise high, mental prayer is the 
next stage, but the highest stage is when the Lord has been realised." Mark, the 


same earnest man who is kneeling before the idol tells you, "'Him the Sun 
cannot express, nor the moon, nor the stars, the lightning cannot express Him, 
nor what we speak of as fire; through Him they shine.'' But he does not abuse 
any one's idol or call its worship sin. He recognises in it a necessary stage of 
life. "The child is father of the man." Would it be right for an old man to say 
that childhood is a sin or youth a sin? 

If a man can realise his divine nature with the help of an image, would it be 
right to call that a sin? Nor even when he has passed that stage, should he call it 
an error. To the Hindu, man is not travelling from error to truth, but from truth 
to truth, from lower to higher truth. To him all the religions, from the lowest 
fetishism to the highest absolutism, mean so many attempts of the human soul 
to grasp and realise the Infinite, each determined by the conditions of its birth 
and association, and each of these marks a stage of progress; and every soul is a 
young eagle soaring higher and higher, gathering more and more strength, till it 
reaches the Glorious Sun. 

Unity in variety is the plan of nature, and the Hindu has recognised it. Every 
other religion lays down certain fixed dogmas, and tries to force society to 
adopt them. It places before society only one coat which must fit Jack and John 
and Henry, all alike. If it does not fit John or Henry, he must go without a coat 
to cover his body. The Hindus have discovered that the absolute can only be 
realised, or thought of, or stated, through the relative, and the images, crosses, 
and crescents are simply so many symbols — so many pegs to hang the 
spiritual ideas on. It is not that this help is necessary for every one, but those 
that do not need it have no right to say that it is wrong. Nor is it compulsory in 
Hinduism. 

One thing I must tell you. Idolatry in India does not mean anything horrible. It 
is not the mother of harlots. On the other hand, it is the attempt of undeveloped 
minds to grasp high spiritual truths. The Hindus have their faults, they 
sometimes have their exceptions; but mark this, they are always for punishing 
their own bodies, and never for cutting the throats of their neighbours. If the 
Hindu fanatic burns himself on the pyre, he never lights the fire of Inquisition. 
And even this cannot be laid at the door of his religion any more than the 
burning of witches can be laid at the door of Christianity. 



To the Hindu, then, the whole world of religions is only a travelling, a coming 
up, of different men and women, through various conditions and 
circumstances, to the same goal. Every religion is only evolving a God out of 
the material man, and the same God is the inspirer of all of them. Why, then, 
are there so many contradictions? They are only apparent, says the Hindu. The 
contradictions come from the same truth adapting itself to the varying 
circumstances of different natures. 

It is the same light coming through glasses of different colours. And these little 
variations are necessary for purposes of adaptation. But in the heart of 
everything the same truth reigns. The Lord has declared to the Hindu in His 
incarnation as Krishna, "/ am in every religion as the thread through a string of 
pearls. Wherever thou seest extraordinary holiness and extraordinary power 
raising and purifying humanity, know thou that 1 am there."' And what has been 
the result? I challenge the world to find, throughout the whole system of 
Sanskrit philosophy, any such expression as that the Hindu alone will be saved 
and not others. Says Vyasa, "We find perfect men even beyond the pale of our 
caste and creed." One thing more. How, then, can the Hindu, whose whole 
fabric of thought centres in God, believe in Buddhism which is agnostic, or in 
Jainism which is atheistic? 

The Buddhists or the Jains do not depend upon God; but the whole force of 
their religion is directed to the great central truth in every religion, to evolve a 
God out of man. They have not seen the Father, but they have seen the Son. 

And he that hath seen the Son hath seen the Father also. 

This, brethren, is a short sketch of the religious ideas of the Hindus. The Hindu 
may have failed to carry out all his plans, but if there is ever to be a universal 
religion, it must be one which will have no location in place or time; which will 
be infinite like the God it will preach, and whose sun will shine upon the 
followers of Krishna and of Christ, on saints and sinners alike; which will not 
be Brahminic or Buddhistic, Christian or Mohammedan, but the sum total of all 
these, and still have infinite space for development; which in its catholicity will 
embrace in its infinite arms, and find a place for, every human being, from the 
lowest grovelling savage not far removed from the brute, to the highest man 


towering by the virtues of his head and heart almost above humanity, making 
society stand in awe of him and doubt his human nature. It will be a religion 
which will have no place for persecution or intolerance in its polity, which will 
recognise divinity in every man and woman, and whose whole scope, whose 
whole force, will be created in aiding humanity to realise its own true, divine 
nature. 

Offer such a religion, and all the nations will follow you. Asoka's council was a 
council of the Buddhist faith. Akbar's, though more to the purpose, was only a 
parlour-meeting. It was reserved for America to proclaim to all quarters of the 
globe that the Lord is in every religion. 

May He who is the Brahman of the Hindus, the Ahura-Mazda of the 
Zoroastrians, the Buddha of the Buddhists, the Jehovah of the Jews, the Father 
in Heaven of the Christians, give strength to you to carry out your noble idea! 
The star arose in the East; it travelled steadily towards the West, sometimes 
dimmed and sometimes effulgent, till it made a circuit of the world; and now it 
is again rising on the very horizon of the East, the borders of the Sanpo, a 
thousandfold more effulgent than it ever was before. 

Hail, Columbia, motherland of liberty! It has been given to thee, who never 
dipped her hand in her neighbour’s blood, who never found out that the shortest 
way of becoming rich was by robbing one’s neighbours, it has been given to 
thee to march at the vanguard of civilisation with the flag of harmony. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

RELIGION NOT THE CRYING NEED OF INDIA 

20th September, 1893 

Christians must always be ready for good criticism, and I hardly think that you 
will mind if I make a little criticism. You Christians, who are so fond of 
sending out missionaries to save the soul of the heathen — why do you not try 
to save their bodies from starvation? In India, during the terrible famines, 
thousands died from hunger, yet you Christians did nothing. You erect 
churches all through India, but the crying evil in the East is not religion — they 
have religion enough — but it is bread that the suffering millions of burning 
India cry out for with parched throats. They ask us for bread, but we give them 
stones. It is an insult to a starving people to offer them religion; it is an insult to 
a starving man to teach him metaphysics. In India a priest that preached for 
money would lose caste and be spat upon by the people. I came here to seek aid 
for my impoverished people, and I fully realised how difficult it was to get help 
for heathens from Christians in a Christian land. 


» 









Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

BUDDHISM, THE FULFILMENT OF HINDUISM 

26th September, 1893 

I am not a Buddhist, as you have heard, and yet I am. If China, or Japan, or 
Ceylon follow the teachings of the Great Master, India worships him as God 
incarnate on earth. You have just now heard that I am going to criticise 
Buddhism, but by that I wish you to understand only this. Far be it from me to 
criticise him whom I worship as God incarnate on earth. But our views about 
Buddha are that he was not understood properly by his disciples. The relation 
between Hinduism (by Hinduism, I mean the religion of the Vedas) and what is 
called Buddhism at the present day is nearly the same as between Judaism and 
Christianity. Jesus Christ was a Jew, and Shakya Muni was a Hindu. The Jews 
rejected Jesus Christ, nay, crucified him, and the Hindus have accepted Shakya 
Muni as God and worship him. But the real difference that we Hindus want to 
show between modern Buddhism and what we should understand as the 
teachings of Lord Buddha lies principally in this: Shakya Muni came to preach 
nothing new. He also, like Jesus, came to fulfil and not to destroy. Only, in the 
case of Jesus, it was the old people, the Jews, who did not understand him, 
while in the case of Buddha, it was his own followers who did not realise the 
import of his teachings. As the Jew did not understand the fulfilment of the Old 
Testament, so the Buddhist did not understand the fulfilment of the truths of the 
Hindu religion. Again, I repeat, Shakya Muni came not to destroy, but he was 
the fulfilment, the logical conclusion, the logical development of the religion of 
the Hindus. 

The religion of the Hindus is divided into two parts: the ceremonial and the 
spiritual. The spiritual portion is specially studied by the monks. 

In that there is no caste. A man from the highest caste and a man from the 
lowest may become a monk in India, and the two castes become equal. In 
religion there is no caste; caste is simply a social institution. Shakya Muni 
himself was a monk, and it was his glory that he had the large-heartedness to 
bring out the truths from the hidden Vedas and through them broadcast all over 






the world. He was the first being in the world who brought missionarising into 
practice — nay, he was the first to conceive the idea of proselytising. 

The great glory of the Master lay in his wonderful sympathy for everybody, 
especially for the ignorant and the poor. Some of his disciples were Brahmins. 
When Buddha was teaching, Sanskrit was no more the spoken language in 
India. It was then only in the books of the learned. Some of Buddha's Brahmins 
disciples wanted to translate his teachings into Sanskrit, but he distinctly told 
them, "I am for the poor, for the people; let me speak in the tongue of the 
people." And so to this day the great bulk of his teachings are in the vernacular 
of that day in India. 

Whatever may be the position of philosophy, whatever may be the position of 
metaphysics, so long as there is such a thing as death in the world, so long as 
there is such a thing as weakness in the human heart, so long as there is a cry 
going out of the heart of man in his very weakness, there shall be a faith in 
God. 

On the philosophic side the disciples of the Great Master dashed themselves 
against the eternal rocks of the Vedas and could not crush them, and on the 
other side they took away from the nation that eternal God to which every one, 
man or woman, clings so fondly. And the result was that Buddhism had to die a 
natural death in India. At the present day there is not one who calls oneself a 
Buddhist in India, the land of its birth. 

But at the same time, Brahminism lost something — that reforming zeal, that 
wonderful sympathy and charity for everybody, that wonderful heaven which 
Buddhism had brought to the masses and which had rendered Indian society so 
great that a Greek historian who wrote about India of that time was led to say 
that no Hindu was known to tell an untruth and no Hindu woman was known to 
be unchaste. 

Hinduism cannot live without Buddhism, nor Buddhism without Hinduism. 
Then realise what the separation has shown to us, that the Buddhists cannot 
stand without the brain and philosophy of the Brahmins, nor the Brahmin 
without the heart of the Buddhist. This separation between the Buddhists and 
the Brahmins is the cause of the downfall of India. That is why India is 




populated by three hundred millions of beggars, and that is why India has been 
the slave of conquerors for the last thousand years. Let us then join the 
wonderful intellect of the Brahmins with the heart, the noble soul, the 
wonderful humanising power of the Great Master. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of Religions / 

« 

ADDRESS AT THE FINAL SESSION 

27th September, 1893 

The World's Parliament of Religions has become an accomplished fact, and the 
merciful Father has helped those who laboured to bring it into existence, and 
crowned with success their most unselfish labour. 

My thanks to those noble souls whose large hearts and love of truth first 
dreamed this wonderful dream and then realised it. My thanks to the shower of 
liberal sentiments that has overflowed this platform. My thanks to his 
enlightened audience for their uniform kindness to me and for their 
appreciation of every thought that tends to smooth the friction of religions. A 
few jarring notes were heard from time to time in this harmony. My special 
thanks to them, for they have, by their striking contrast, made general harmony 
the sweeter. 

Much has been said of the common ground of religious unity. I am not going 
just now to venture my own theory. But if any one here hopes that this unity 
will come by the triumph of any one of the religions and the destruction of the 
others, to him I say, “Brother, yours is an impossible hope.” Do I wish that the 
Christian would become Hindu? God forbid. Do I wish that the Hindu or 
Buddhist would become Christian? God forbid. 

The seed is put in the ground, and earth and air and water are placed around it. 
Does the seed become the earth; or the air, or the water? No. It becomes a 
plant, it develops after the law of its own growth, assimilates the air, the earth, 
and the water, converts them into plant substance, and grows into a plant. 

Similar is the case with religion. The Christian is not to become a Hindu or a 
Buddhist, nor a Hindu or a Buddhist to become a Christian. But each must 
assimilate the spirit of the others and yet preserve his individuality and grow 
according to his own law of growth. 


If the Parliament of Religions has shown anything to the world it is this: It has 






proved to the world that holiness, purity and charity are not the exclusive 
possessions of any church in the world, and that every system has produced 
men and women of the most exalted character. In the face of this evidence, if 
anybody dreams of the exclusive survival of his own religion and the 
destruction of the others, I pity him from the bottom of my heart, and point out 
to him that upon the banner of every religion will soon be written, in spite of 
resistance: "Help and not Fight," "Assimilation and not Destruction," 
"Harmony and Peace and not Dissension." 


» 


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 1 
Karma-Yoga 

Karma in its Effect on Character 

Each is great in his own place 

The Secret of Work 

What is Duty? 

We help ourselves, not the world 
Non-attaehment is complete self-abnegation 

Freedom 

The Ideal of Karma-Yoga 












« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER I 

KARMA IN ITS EFFECT ON CHARACTER 

The word Karma is derived from the Sanskrit Kri, to do; all action is Karma. 
Technically, this word also means the effects of actions. In connection with 
metaphysics, it sometimes means the effects, of which our past actions were the 
causes. But in Karma-Yoga we have simply to do with the word Karma as 
meaning work. The goal of mankind is knowledge. That is the one ideal placed 
before us by Eastern philosophy. Pleasure is not the goal of man, but 
knowledge. Pleasure and happiness come to an end. It is a mistake to suppose 
that pleasure is the goal. The cause of all the miseries we have in the world is 
that men foolishly think pleasure to be the ideal to strive for. After a time man 
finds that it is not happiness, but knowledge, towards which he is going, and 
that both pleasure and pain are great teachers, and that he learns as much from 
evil as from good. As pleasure and pain pass before his soul they have upon it 
different pictures, and the result of these combined impressions is what is called 
man's "character". If you take the character of any man, it really is but the 
aggregate of tendencies, the sum total of the bent of his mind; you will find that 
misery and happiness are equal factors in the formation of that character. Good 
and evil have an equal share in moulding character, and in some instances 
misery is a greater teacher than happiness. In studying the great characters the 
world has produced, I dare say, in the vast majority of cases, it would be found 
that it was misery that taught more than happiness, it was poverty that taught 
more than wealth, it was blows that brought out their inner fire more than 
praise. 

Now this knowledge, again, is inherent in man. No knowledge comes from 
outside; it is all inside. What we say a man "knows", should, in strict 
psychological language, be what he "discovers" or "unveils"; what a man 
"learns" is really what he "discovers", by taking the cover off his own soul, 
which is a mine of infinite knowledge. 

We say Newton discovered gravitation. Was it sitting anywhere in a corner 






waiting for him? It was in his own mind; the time came and he found it out. All 
knowledge that the world has ever received comes from the mind; the infinite 
library of the universe is in your own mind. The external world is simply the 
suggestion, the occasion, which sets you to study your own mind, but the object 
of your study is always your own mind. The falling of an apple gave the 
suggestion to Newton, and he studied his own mind. He rearranged all the 
previous links of thought in his mind and discovered a new link among them, 
which we call the law of gravitation. It was not in the apple nor in anything in 
the centre of the earth. 

All knowledge, therefore, secular or spiritual, is in the human mind. In many 
cases it is not discovered, but remains covered, and when the covering is being 
slowly taken off, we say, "We are learning," and the advance of knowledge is 
made by the advance of this process of uncovering. The man from whom this 
veil is being lifted is the more knowing man, the man upon whom it lies thick is 
ignorant, and the man from whom it has entirely gone is all-knowing, 
omniscient. There have been omniscient men, and, I believe, there will be yet; 
and that there will be myriads of them in the cycles to come. Like fire in a piece 
of flint, knowledge exists in the mind; suggestion is the friction which brings it 
out. So with all our feelings and action — our tears and our smiles, our joys and 
our griefs, our weeping and our laughter, our curses and our blessings, our 
praises and our blames — every one of these we may find, if we calmly study 
our own selves, to have been brought out from within ourselves by so many 
blows. The result is what we are. All these blows taken together are called 
Karma — work, action. Every mental and physical blow that is given to the 
soul, by which, as it were, fire is struck from it, and by which its own power 
and knowledge are discovered, is Karma, this word being used in its widest 
sense. Thus we are all doing Karma all the time. I am talking to you: that is 
Karma. You are listening: that is Karma. We breathe: that is Karma. We walk: 
Karma. Everything we do, physical or mental, is Karma, and it leaves its marks 
on us. 

There are certain works which are, as it were, the aggregate, the sum total, of a 
large number of smaller works. If we stand near the seashore and hear the 
waves dashing against the shingle, we think it is such a great noise, and yet we 
know that one wave is really composed of millions and millions of minute 




waves. Each one of these is making a noise, and yet we do not catch it; it is 
only when they become the big aggregate that we hear. Similarly, every 
pulsation of the heart is work. Certain kinds of work we feel and they become 
tangible to us; they are, at the same time, the aggregate of a number of small 
works. If you really want to judge of the character of a man, look not at his 
great performances. Every fool may become a hero at one time or another. 
Watch a man do his most common actions; those are indeed the things which 
will tell you the real character of a great man. Great occasions rouse even the 
lowest of human beings to some kind of greatness, but he alone is the really 
great man whose character is great always, the same wherever he be. 

Karma in its effect on character is the most tremendous power that man has to 
deal with. Man is, as it were, a centre, and is attracting all the powers of the 
universe towards himself, and in this centre is fusing them all and again sending 
them off in a big current. Such a centre is the real man — the almighty, the 
omniscient — and he draws the whole universe towards him. Good and bad, 
misery and happiness, all are running towards him and clinging round him; and 
out of them he fashions the mighty stream of tendency called character and 
throws it outwards. As he has the power of drawing in anything, so has he the 
power of throwing it out. 

All the actions that we see in the world, all the movements in human society, all 
the works that we have around us, are simply the display of thought, the 
manifestation of the will of man. Machines or instruments, cities, ships, or men- 
of-war, all these are simply the manifestation of the will of man; and this will is 
caused by character, and character is manufactured by Karma. As is Karma, so 
is the manifestation of the will. The men of mighty will the world has produced 
have all been tremendous workers — gigantic souls, with wills powerful 
enough to overturn worlds, wills they got by persistent work, through ages, and 
ages. Such a gigantic will as that of a Buddha or a Jesus could not be obtained 
in one life, for we know who their fathers were. It is not known that their 
fathers ever spoke a word for the good of mankind. Millions and millions of 
carpenters like Joseph had gone; millions are still living. Millions and millions 
of petty kings like Buddha's father had been in the world. If it was only a case 
of hereditary transmission, how do you account for this petty prince, who was 
not, perhaps, obeyed by his own servants, producing this son, whom half a 



world worships? How do you explain the gulf between the carpenter and his 
son, whom millions of human beings worship as God? It cannot be solved by 
the theory of heredity. The gigantic will which Buddha and Jesus threw over 
the world, whence did it come? Whence came this accumulation of power? It 
must have been there through ages and ages, continually growing bigger and 
bigger, until it burst on society in a Buddha or a Jesus, even rolling down to the 
present day. 

All this is determined by Karma, work. No one can get anything unless he earns 
it. This is an eternal law. We may sometimes think it is not so, but in the long 
run we become convinced of it. A man may struggle all his life for riches; he 
may cheat thousands, but he finds at last that he did not deserve to become rich, 
and his life becomes a trouble and a nuisance to him. We may go on 
accumulating things for our physical enjoyment, but only what we earn is really 
ours. A fool may buy all the books in the world, and they will be in his library; 
but he will be able to read only those that he deserves to; and this deserving is 
produced by Karma. Our Karma determines what we deserve and what we can 
assimilate. We are responsible for what we are; and whatever we wish 
ourselves to be, we have the power to make ourselves. If what we are now has 
been the result of our own past actions, it certainly follows that whatever we 
wish to be in future can be produced by our present actions; so we have to 
know how to act. You will say, “What is the use of learning how to work? 
Everyone works in some way or other in this world.” But there is such a thing 
as frittering away our energies. With regard to Karma-Yoga, the Gita says that 
it is doing work with cleverness and as a science; by knowing how to work, one 
can obtain the greatest results. You must remember that all work is simply to 
bring out the power of the mind which is already there, to wake up the soul. 

The power is inside every man, so is knowing; the different works are like 
blows to bring them out, to cause these giants to wake up. 

Man works with various motives. There cannot be work without motive. Some 
people want to get fame, and they work for fame. Others want money, and they 
work for money. Others want to have power, and they work for power. Others 
want to get to heaven, and they work for the same. Others want to leave a name 
when they die, as they do in China, where no man gets a title until he is dead; 
and that is a better way, after all, than with us. When a man does something 


very good there, they give a title of nobility to his father, who is dead, or to his 
grandfather. Some people work for that. Some of the followers of certain 
Mohammedan sects work all their lives to have a big tomb built for them when 
they die. I know sects among whom, as soon as a child is born, a tomb is 
prepared for it; that is among them the most important work a man has to do, 
and the bigger and the finer the tomb, the better off the man is supposed to be. 
Others work as a penance; do all sorts of wicked things, then erect a temple, or 
give something to the priests to buy them off and obtain from them a passport 
to heaven. They think that this kind of beneficence will clear them and they will 
go scot-free in spite of their sinfulness. Such are some of the various motives 
for work. 

Work for work's sake. There are some who are really the salt of the earth in 
every country and who work for work's sake, who do not care for name, or 
fame, or even to go to heaven. They work just because good will come of it. 
There are others who do good to the poor and help mankind from still higher 
motives, because they believe in doing good and love good. The motive for 
name and fame seldom brings immediate results, as a rule; they come to us 
when we are old and have almost done with life. If a man works without any 
selfish motive in view, does he not gain anything? Yes, he gains the highest. 
Unselfishness is more paying, only people have not the patience to practice it. It 
is more paying from the point of view of health also. Love, truth, and 
unselfishness are not merely moral figures of speech, but they form our highest 
ideal, because in them lies such a manifestation of power. In the first place, a 
man who can work for five days, or even for five minutes, without any selfish 
motive whatever, without thinking of future, of heaven, of punishment, or 
anything of the kind, has in him the capacity to become a powerful moral giant. 
It is hard to do it, but in the heart of our hearts we know its value, and the good 
it brings. It is the greatest manifestation of power — this tremendous restraint; 
self-restraint is a manifestation of greater power than all outgoing action. A 
carriage with four horses may rush down a hill unrestrained, or the coachman 
may curb the horses. Which is the greater manifestation of power, to let them 
go or to hold them? A cannonball flying through the air goes a long distance 
and falls. Another is cut short in its flight by striking against a wall, and the 
impact generates intense heat. All outgoing energy following a selfish motive is 
frittered away; it will not cause power to return to you; but if restrained, it will 



result in development of power. This self-control will tend to produce a mighty 
will, a character which makes a Christ or a Buddha. Foolish men do not know 
this secret; they nevertheless want to rule mankind. Even a fool may rule the 
whole world if he works and waits. Let him wait a few years, restrain that 
foolish idea of governing; and when that idea is wholly gone, he will be a 
power in the world. The majority of us cannot see beyond a few years, just as 
some animals cannot see beyond a few steps. Just a little narrow circle — that 
is our world. We have not the patience to look beyond, and thus become 
immoral and wicked. This is our weakness, our powerlessness. 

Even the lowest forms of work are not to be despised. Let the man, who knows 
no better, work for selfish ends, for name and fame; but everyone should 
always try to get towards higher and higher motives and to understand them. 
"To work we have the right, but not to the fruits thereof:" Leave the fruits 
alone. Why care for results? If you wish to help a man, never think what that 
man's attitude should be towards you. If you want to do a great or a good work, 
do not trouble to think what the result will be. 

There arises a difficult question in this ideal of work. Intense activity is 
necessary; we must always work. We cannot live a minute without work. What 
then becomes of rest? Here is one side of the life-struggle — work, in which we 
are whirled rapidly round. And here is the other — that of calm, retiring 
renunciation: everything is peaceful around, there is very little of noise and 
show, only nature with her animals and flowers and mountains. Neither of them 
is a perfect picture. A man used to solitude, if brought in contact with the 
surging whirlpool of the world, will be crushed by it; just as the fish that lives 
in the deep sea water, as soon as it is brought to the surface, breaks into pieces, 
deprived of the weight of water on it that had kept it together. Can a man who 
has been used to the turmoil and the rush of life live at ease if he comes to a 
quiet place? He suffers and perchance may lose his mind. The ideal man is he 
who, in the midst of the greatest silence and solitude, finds the intensest 
activity, and in the midst of the intensest activity finds the silence and solitude 
of the desert. He has learnt the secret of restraint, he has controlled himself. He 
goes through the streets of a big city with all its traffic, and his mind is as calm 
as if he were in a cave, where not a sound could reach him; and he is intensely 
working all the time. That is the ideal of Karma-Yoga, and if you have attained 



to that you have really learnt the secret of work. 

But we have to begin from the beginning, to take up the works as they come to 
us and slowly make ourselves more unselfish every day. We must do the work 
and find out the motive power that prompts us; and, almost without exception, 
in the first years, we shall find that our motives are always selfish; but 
gradually this selfishness will melt by persistence, till at last will come the time 
when we shall be able to do really unselfish work. We may all hope that some 
day or other, as we struggle through the paths of life, there will come a time 
when we shall become perfectly unselfish; and the moment we attain to that, all 
our powers will be concentrated, and the knowledge which is ours will be 
manifest. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER II 

EACH IS GREAT IN HIS OWN PLACE 

According to the Sankhya philosophy, nature is composed of three forces 
called, in Sanskrit, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas. These as manifested in the 
physical world are what we may call equilibrium, activity, and inertness. 

Tamas is typified as darkness or inactivity; Rajas is activity, expressed as 
attraction or repulsion; and Sattva is the equilibrium of the two. 

In every man there are these three forces. Sometimes Tamas prevails. We 
become lazy, we cannot move, we are inactive, bound down by certain ideas or 
by mere dullness. At other times activity prevails, and at still other times that 
calm balancing of both. Again, in different men, one of these forces is 
generally predominant. The characteristic of one man is inactivity, dullness and 
laziness; that of another, activity, power, manifestation of energy; and in still 
another we find the sweetness, calmness, and gentleness, which are due to the 
balancing of both action and inaction. So in all creation — in animals, plants, 
and men — we find the more or less typical manifestation of all these different 
forces. 

Karma-Yoga has specially to deal with these three factors. By teaching what 
they are and how to employ them, it helps us to do our work better. Human 
society is a graded organization. We all know about morality, and we all know 
about duty, but at the same time we find that in different countries the 
significance of morality varies greatly. What is regarded as moral in one 
country may in another be considered perfectly immoral. For instance, in one 
country cousins may marry; in another, it is thought to be very immoral; in one, 
men may marry their sisters-in-law; in another, it is regarded as immoral; in 
one country people may marry only once; in another, many times; and so forth. 
Similarly, in all other departments of morality, we find the standard varies 
greatly — yet we have the idea that there must be a universal standard of 
morality. 









So it is with duty. The idea of duty varies much among different nations. In one 
country, if a man does not do certain things, people will say he has acted 
wrongly; while if he does those very things in another country, people will say 
that he did not act rightly — and yet we know that there must be some 
universal idea of duty. In the same way, one class of society thinks that certain 
things are among its duty, while another class thinks quite the opposite and 
would be horrified if it had to do those things. Two ways are left open to us — 
the way of the ignorant, who think that there is only one way to truth and that 
all the rest are wrong, and the way of the wise, who admit that, according to 
our mental constitution or the different planes of existence in which we are, 
duty and morality may vary. The important thing is to know that there are 
gradations of duty and of morality — that the duty of one state of life, in one 
set of circumstances, will not and cannot be that of another. 

To illustrate: All great teachers have taught, "Resist not evil," that non- 
resistance is the highest moral ideal. We all know that, if a certain number of us 
attempted to put that maxim fully into practice, the whole social fabric would 
fall to pieces, the wicked would take possession of our properties and our lives, 
and would do whatever they liked with us. Even if only one day of such non- 
resistance were practiced, it would lead to disaster. Yet, intuitively, in our heart 
of hearts we feel the truth of the teaching "Resist not evil." This seems to us to 
be the highest ideal; yet to teach this doctrine only would be equivalent to 
condemning a vast portion of mankind. Not only so, it would be making men 
feel that they were always doing wrong, and cause in them scruples of 
conscience in all their actions; it would weaken them, and that constant self¬ 
disapproval would breed more vice than any other weakness would. To the 
man who has begun to hate himself the gate to degeneration has already 
opened; and the same is true of a nation. 

Our first duty is not to hate ourselves, because to advance we must have faith in 
ourselves first and then in God. He who has no faith in himself can never have 
faith in God. Therefore, the only alternative remaining to us is to recognise that 
duty and morality vary under different circumstances; not that the man who 
resists evil is doing what is always and in itself wrong, but that in the different 
circumstances in which he is placed it may become even his duty to resist evil. 




In reading the Bhagavad-Gita, many of you in Western countries may have felt 
astonished at the second chapter, wherein Shri Krishna calls Arjuna a hypocrite 
and a coward because of his refusal to fight, or offer resistance, on account of 
his adversaries being his friends and relatives, making the plea that non- 
resistance was the highest ideal of love. This is a great lesson for us all to learn, 
that in all matters the two extremes are alike. The extreme positive and the 
extreme negative are always similar. When the vibrations of light are too slow, 
we do not see them, nor do we see them when they are too rapid. So with 
sound; when very low in pitch, we do not hear it; when very high, we do not 
hear it either. Of like nature is the difference between resistance and non- 
resistance. One man does not resist because he is weak, lazy, and cannot, not 
because he will not; the other man knows that he can strike an irresistible blow 
if he likes; yet he not only does not strike, but blesses his enemies. The one 
who from weakness resists not commits a sin, and as such cannot receive any 
benefit from the non-resistance; while the other would commit a sin by offering 
resistance. Buddha gave up his throne and renounced his position, that was true 
renunciation; but there cannot be any question of renunciation in the case of a 
beggar who has nothing to renounce. So we must always be careful about what 
we really mean when we speak of this non-resistance and ideal love. We must 
first take care to understand whether we have the power of resistance or not. 
Then, having the power, if we renounce it and do not resist, we are doing a 
grand act of love; but if we cannot resist, and yet, at the same time, try to 
deceive ourselves into the belief that we are actuated by motives of the highest 
love, we are doing the exact opposite. Arjuna became a coward at the sight of 
the mighty array against him; his "love" made him forget his duty towards his 
country and king. That is why Shri Krishna told him that he was a hypocrite: 
Thou talkest like a wise man, but thy actions betray thee to be a coward; 
therefore stand up and fight! 

Such is the central idea of Karma-Yoga. The Karma-Yogi is the man who 
understands that the highest ideal is non-resistance, and who also knows that 
this non-resistance is the highest manifestation of power in actual possession, 
and also what is called the resisting of evil is but a step on the way towards the 
manifestation of this highest power, namely, non-resistance. Before reaching 
this highest ideal, man's duty is to resist evil; let him work, let him fight, let 
him strike straight from the shoulder. Then only, when he has gained the power 


to resist, will non-resistance be a virtue. 


I once met a man in my country whom I had known before as a very stupid, 
dull person, who knew nothing and had not the desire to know anything, and 
was living the life of a brute. He asked me what he should do to know God, 
how he was to get free. "Can you tell a lie?" I asked him. "No," he replied. 
"Then you must learn to do so. It is better to tell a lie than to be a brute, or a log 
of wood. You are inactive; you have not certainly reached the highest state, 
which is beyond all actions, calm and serene; you are too dull even to do 
something wicked." That was an extreme case, of course, and I was joking with 
him; but what I meant was that a man must be active in order to pass through 
activity to perfect calmness. 

Inactivity should be avoided by all means. Activity always means resistance. 
Resist all evils, mental and physical; and when you have succeeded in resisting, 
then will calmness come. It is very easy to say, "Hate nobody, resist not evil," 
but we know what that kind of thing generally means in practice. When the 
eyes of society are turned towards us, we may make a show of non-resistance, 
but in our hearts it is canker all the time. We feel the utter want of the calm of 
non-resistance; we feel that it would be better for us to resist. If you desire 
wealth, and know at the same time that the whole world regards him who aims 
at wealth as a very wicked man, you, perhaps, will not dare to plunge into the 
struggle for wealth, yet your mind will be running day and night after money. 
This is hypocrisy and will serve no purpose. Plunge into the world, and then, 
after a time, when you have suffered and enjoyed all that is in it, will 
renunciation come; then will calmness come. So fulfil your desire for power 
and everything else, and after you have fulfilled the desire, will come the time 
when you will know that they are all very little things; but until you have 
fulfilled this desire, until you have passed through that activity, it is impossible 
for you to come to the state of calmness, serenity, and self-surrender. These 
ideas of serenity and renunciation have been preached for thousands of years; 
everybody has heard of them from childhood, and yet we see very few in the 
world who have really reached that stage. I do not know if I have seen twenty 
persons in my life who are really calm and non-resisting, and I have travelled 
over half the world. 


Every man should take up his own ideal and endeavour to accomplish it. That 
is a surer way of progress than taking up other men's ideals, which he can never 
hope to accomplish. For instance, we take a child and at once give him the task 
of walking twenty miles. Either the little one dies, or one in a thousand crawls 
the twenty miles, to reach the end exhausted and half-dead. That is like what 
we generally try to do with the world. All the men and women, in any society, 
are not of the same mind, capacity, or of the same power to do things; they 
must have different ideals, and we have no right to sneer at any ideal. Let every 
one do the best he can for realising his own ideal. Nor is it right that I should be 
judged by your standard or you by mine. The apple tree should not be judged 
by the standard of the oak, nor the oak by that of the apple. To judge the apple 
tree you must take the apple standard, and for the oak, its own standard. 

Unity in variety is the plan of creation. However men and women may vary 
individually, there is unity in the background. The different individual 
characters and classes of men and women are natural variations in creation. 
Hence, we ought not to judge them by the same standard or put the same ideal 
before them. Such a course creates only an unnatural struggle, and the result is 
that man begins to hate himself and is hindered from becoming religious and 
good. Our duty is to encourage every one in his struggle to live up to his own 
highest ideal, and strive at the same time to make the ideal as near as possible 
to the truth. 

In the Hindu system of morality we find that this fact has been recognised from 
very ancient times; and in their scriptures and books on ethics different rules 
are laid down for the different classes of men — the householder, the 
Sannyasin (the man who has renounced the world), and the student. 

The life of every individual, according to the Hindu scriptures, has its peculiar 
duties apart from what belongs in common to universal humanity. The Hindu 
begins life as a student; then he marries and becomes a householder; in old age 
he retires; and lastly he gives up the world and becomes a Sannyasin. To each 
of these stages of life certain duties are attached. No one of these stages is 
intrinsically superior to another. The life of the married man is quite as great as 
that of the celibate who has devoted himself to religious work. The scavenger 
in the street is quite as great and glorious as the king on his throne. Take him 



off his throne, make him do the work of the scavenger, and see how he fares. 
Take up the scavenger and see how he will rule. It is useless to say that the man 
who lives out of the world is a greater man than he who lives in the world; it is 
much more difficult to live in the world and worship God than to give it up and 
live a free and easy life. The four stages of life in India have in later times been 
reduced to two — that of the householder and of the monk. The householder 
marries and carries on his duties as a citizen, and the duty of the other is to 
devote his energies wholly to religion, to preach and to worship God. I shall 
read to you a few passages from the Maha-Nirvana-Tantra, which treats of this 
subject, and you will see that it is a very difficult task for a man to be a 
householder, and perform all his duties perfectly: 

The householder should be devoted to God; the knowledge of God should be his goal of life. 
Yet he must work constantly, perform all his duties; he must give up the fruits of his actions to 
God. 

It is the most difficult thing in this world to work and not care for the result, to 
help a man and never think that he ought to be grateful, to do some good work 
and at the same time never look to see whether it brings you name or fame, or 
nothing at all. Even the most arrant coward becomes brave when the world 
praises him. A fool can do heroic deeds when the approbation of society is 
upon him, but for a man to constantly do good without caring for the 
approbation of his fellow men is indeed the highest sacrifice man can perform. 
The great duty of the householder is to earn a living, but he must take care that 
he does not do it by telling lies, or by cheating, or by robbing others; and he 
must remember that his life is for the service of God, and the poor. 

Knowing that mother and father are the visible representatives of God, the householder, always 
and by all means, must please them. If the mother is pleased, and the father, God is pleased 
with the man. That child is really a good child who never speaks harsh words to his parents. 

Before parents one must not utter jokes, must not show restlessness, must not show anger or 
temper. Before mother or father, a child must bow down low, and stand up in their presence, 
and must not take a seat until they order him to sit. 

If the householder has food and drink and clothes without first seeing that his mother and his 
father, his children, his wife, and the poor, are supplied, he is committing a sin. The mother and 
the father are the causes of this body; so a man must undergo a thousand troubles in order to do 
good to them. 



Even so is his duty to his wife. No man should scold his wife, and he must always maintain her 
as if she were his own mother. And even when he is in the greatest difficulties and troubles, he 
must not show anger to his wife. 

He who thinks of another woman besides his wife, if he touches her even with his mind — that 
man goes to dark hell. 

Before women he must not talk improper language, and never brag of his powers. He must not 
say, “I have done this, and I have done that.” 

The householder must always please his wife with money, clothes, love, faith, and words like 
nectar, and never do anything to disturb her. That man who has succeeded in getting the love of 
a chaste wife has succeeded in his religion and has all the virtues. 

The following are duties towards children: 

A son should be lovingly reared up to his fourth year; he should be educated till he is sixteen. 
When he is twenty years of age he should be employed in some work; he should then be treated 
affectionately by his father as his equal. Exactly in the same manner the daughter should be 
brought up, and should be educated with the greatest care. And when she marries, the father 
ought to give her jewels and wealth. 

Then the duty of the man is towards his brothers and sisters, and towards the children of his 
brothers and sisters, if they are poor, and towards his other relatives, his friends and his 
servants. Then his duties are towards the people of the same village, and the poor, and any one 
that comes to him for help. Having sufficient means, if the householder does not take care to 
give to his relatives and to the poor, know him to be only a brute; he is not a human being. 

Excessive attachment to food, clothes, and the tending of the body, and dressing of the hair 
should be avoided. The householder must be pure in heart and clean in body, always active and 
always ready for work. 

To his enemies the householder must be a hero. Them he must resist. That is the duty of the 
householder. He must not sit down in a corner and weep, and talk nonsense about non- 
resistance. If he does not show himself a hero to his enemies he has not done his duty. And to 
his friends and relatives he must be as gentle as a lamb. 

It is the duty of the householder not to pay reverence to the wicked; because, if he reverences 
the wicked people of the world, he patronizes wickedness; and it will be a great mistake if he 
disregards those who are worthy of respect, the good people. He must not be gushing in his 
friendship; he must not go out of the way making friends everywhere; he must watch the 
actions of the men he wants to make friends with, and their dealings with other men, reason 
upon them, and then make friends. 


These three things he must not talk of. He must not talk in public of his own fame; he must not 
preach his own name or his own powers; he must not talk of his wealth, or of anything that has 
been told to him privately. 

A man must not say he is poor, or that he is wealthy — he must not brag of his wealth. Let him 
keep his own counsel; this is his religious duty. This is not mere worldly wisdom; if a man does 
not do so, he may be held to be immoral. 

The householder is the basis, the prop, of the whole society. He is the principal 
earner. The poor, the weak, the children and the women who do not work — all 
live upon the householder; so there must be certain duties that he has to 
perform, and these duties must make him feel strong to perform them, and not 
make him think that he is doing things beneath his ideal. Therefore, if he has 
done something weak, or has made some mistake, he must not say so in public; 
and if he is engaged in some enterprise and knows he is sure to fail in it, he 
must not speak of it. Such self-exposure is not only uncalled for, but also 
unnerves the man and makes him unfit for the performance of his legitimate 
duties in life. At the same time, he must struggle hard to acquire these things — 
firstly, knowledge, and secondly, wealth. It is his duty, and if he does not do his 
duty, he is nobody. A householder who does not struggle to get wealth is 
immoral. If he is lazy and content to lead an idle life, he is immoral, because 
upon him depend hundreds. If he gets riches, hundreds of others will be thereby 
supported. 

If there were not in this city hundreds who had striven to become rich, and who 
had acquired wealth, where would all this civilization, and these alms-houses 
and great houses be? 

Going after wealth in such a case is not bad, because that wealth is for 
distribution. The householder is the centre of life and society. It is a worship for 
him to acquire and spend wealth nobly, for the householder who struggles to 
become rich by good means and for good purposes is doing practically the 
same thing for the attainment of salvation as the anchorite does in his cell when 
he is praying; for in them we see only the different aspects of the same virtue of 
self-surrender and self-sacrifice prompted by the feeling of devotion to God 
and to all that is His. 




He must struggle to acquire a good name by all means. He must not gamble, he 
must not move in the company of the wicked, he must not tell lies, and must 
not be the cause of trouble to others. 

Often people enter into things they have not the means to accomplish, with the 
result that they cheat others to attain their own ends. Then there is in all things 
the time factor to be taken into consideration; what at one time might be a 
failure, would perhaps at another time be a very great success. 

The householder must speak the truth, and speak gently, using words which people like, which 
will do good to others; nor should he talk of the business of other men. 

The householder by digging tanks, by planting trees on the roadsides, by establishing rest- 
houses for men and animals, by making roads and building bridges, goes towards the same goal 
as the greatest Yogi. 

This is one part of the doctrine of Karma-Yoga — activity, the duty of the 
householder. There is a passage later on, where it says that "if the householder 
dies in battle, fighting for his country or his religion, he comes to the same goal 
as the Yogi by meditation," showing thereby that what is duty for one is not 
duty for another. At the same time, it does not say that this duty is lowering and 
the other elevating. Each duty has its own place, and according to the 
circumstances in which we are placed, we must perform our duties. 

One idea comes out of all this — the condemnation of all weakness. This is a 
particular idea in all our teachings which I like, either in philosophy, or in 
religion, or in work. If you read the Vedas, you will find this word always 
repeated — fearlessness — fear nothing. Fear is a sign of weakness. A man 
must go about his duties without taking notice of the sneers and the ridicule of 
the world. 

If a man retires from the world to worship God, he must not think that those 
who live in the world and work for the good of the world are not worshipping 
God: neither must those who live in the world, for wife and children, think that 
those who give up the world are low vagabonds. Each is great in his own place. 
This thought I will illustrate by a story. 

A certain king used to inquire of all the Sannyasins that came to his country. 






"Which is the greater man — he who gives up the world and becomes a 
Sannyasin, or he who lives in the world and performs his duties as a house 
holder?" Many wise men sought to solve the problem. Some asserted that the 
Sannyasin was the greater, upon which the king demanded that they should 
prove their assertion. When they could not, he ordered them to marry and 
become householders. Then others came and said, "The householder who 
performs his duties is the greater man." Of them, too, the king demanded 
proofs. When they could not give them, he made them also settle down as 
householders. 

At last there came a young Sannyasin, and the king similarly inquired of him 
also. He answered, "Each, O king, is equally great in his place." "Prove this to 
me," asked the king. "I will prove it to you," said the Sannyasin, "but you must 
first come and live as I do for a few days, that I may be able to prove to you 
what I say." The king consented and followed the Sannyasin out of his own 
territory and passed through many other countries until they came to a great 
kingdom. In the capital of that kingdom a great ceremony was going on. The 
king and the Sannyasin heard the noise of drums and music, and heard also the 
criers; the people were assembled in the streets in gala dress, and a great 
proclamation was being made. The king and the Sannyasin stood there to see 
what was going on. The crier was proclaiming loudly that the princess, 
daughter of the king of that country, was about to choose a husband from 
among those assembled before her. 

It was an old custom in India for princesses to choose husbands in this way. 
Each princess had certain ideas of the sort of man she wanted for a husband. 
Some would have the handsomest man, others would have only the most 
learned, others again the richest, and so on. All the princes of the 
neighbourhood put on their bravest attire and presented themselves before her. 
Sometimes they too had their own criers to enumerate their advantages and the 
reasons why they hoped the princess would choose them. The princess was 
taken round on a throne, in the most splendid array, and looked at and heard 
about them. If she was not pleased with what she saw and heard, she said to 
her bearers, "Move on," and no more notice was taken of the rejected suitors. 
If, however, the princess was pleased with any one of them, she threw a 
garland of flowers over him and he became her husband. 



The princess of the country to which our king and the Sannyasin had come was 
having one of these interesting ceremonies. She was the most beautiful princess 
in the world, and the husband of the princess would be ruler of the kingdom 
after her father's death. The idea of this princess was to marry the handsomest 
man, but she could not find the right one to please her. Several times these 
meetings had taken place, but the princess could not select a husband. This 
meeting was the most splendid of all; more people than ever had come to it. 

The princess came in on a throne, and the bearers carried her from place to 
place. She did not seem to care for any one, and every one became 
disappointed that this meeting also was going to be a failure. Just then came a 
young man, a Sannyasin, handsome as if the sun had come down to the earth, 
and stood in one corner of the assembly, watching what was going on. The 
throne with the princess came near him, and as soon as she saw the beautiful 
Sannyasin, she stopped and threw the garland over him. The young Sannyasin 
seized the garland and threw it off, exclaiming, "What nonsense is this? I am a 
Sannyasin. What is marriage to me?" The king of that country thought that 
perhaps this man was poor and so dared not marry the princess, and said to 
him, "With my daughter goes half my kingdom now, and the whole kingdom 
after my death!" and put the garland again on the Sannyasin. The young man 
threw it off once more, saying, "Nonsense! I do not want to marry," and walked 
quickly away from the assembly. 

Now the princess had fallen so much in love with this young man that she said, 
"I must marry this man or I shall die"; and she went after him to bring him 
back. Then our other Sannyasin, who had brought the king there, said to him, 
"King, let us follow this pair"; so they walked after them, but at a good distance 
behind. The young Sannyasin who had refused to marry the princess walked 
out into the country for several miles. When he came to a forest and entered 
into it, the princess followed him, and the other two followed them. Now this 
young Sannyasin was well acquainted with that forest and knew all the intricate 
paths in it. He suddenly passed into one of these and disappeared, and the 
princess could not discover him. After trying for a long time to find him she sat 
down under a tree and began to weep, for she did not know the way out. Then 
our king and the other Sannyasin came up to her and said, "Do not weep; we 
will show you the way out of this forest, but it is too dark for us to find it now. 


Here is a big tree; let us rest under it, and in the morning we will go early and 
show you the road." 

Now a little bird and his wife and their three little ones lived on that tree, in a 
nest. This little bird looked down and saw the three people under the tree and 
said to his wife, "My dear, what shall we do? Here are some guests in the 
house, and it is winter, and we have no fire." So he flew away and got a bit of 
burning firewood in his beak and dropped it before the guests, to which they 
added fuel and made a blazing fire. But the little bird was not satisfied. He said 
again to his wife, "My dear, what shall we do? There is nothing to give these 
people to eat, and they are hungry. We are householders; it is our duty to feed 
any one who comes to the house. I must do what I can, I will give them my 
body." So he plunged into the midst of the fire and perished. The guests saw 
him falling and tried to save him, but he was too quick for them. 

The little bird's wife saw what her husband did, and she said, "Here are three 
persons and only one little bird for them to eat. It is not enough; it is my duty as 
a wife not to let my husband's effort go in vain; let them have my body also." 
Then she fell into the fire and was burned to death. 

Then the three baby-birds, when they saw what was done and that there was 
still not enough food for the three guests, said, "Our parents have done what 
they could and still it is not enough. It is our duty to carry on the work of our 
parents; let our bodies go too." And they all dashed down into the fire also. 

Amazed at what they saw, the three people could not of course eat these birds. 
They passed the night without food, and in the morning the king and the 
Sannyasin showed the princess the way, and she went back to her father. 

Then the Sannyasin said to the king, "King, you have seen that each is great in 
his own place. If you want to live in the world, live like those birds, ready at 
any moment to sacrifice yourself for others. If you want to renounce the world, 
be like that young man to whom the most beautiful woman and a kingdom 
were as nothing. If you want to be a householder, hold your life a sacrifice for 
the welfare of others; and if you choose the life of renunciation, do not even 
look at beauty and money and power. Each is great in his own place, but the 
duty of the one is not the duty of the other. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER III 
THE SECRET OF WORK 

Helping others physically, by removing their physical needs, is indeed great, 
but the help is great according as the need is greater and according as the help is 
far reaching. If a man's wants can be removed for an hour, it is helping him 
indeed; if his wants can be removed for a year, it will be more help to him; but 
if his wants can be removed for ever, it is surely the greatest help that can be 
given him. Spiritual knowledge is the only thing that can destroy our miseries 
for ever; any other knowledge satisfies wants only for a time. It is only with the 
knowledge of the spirit that the faculty of want is annihilated for ever; so 
helping man spiritually is the highest help that can be given to him. He who 
gives man spiritual knowledge is the greatest benefactor of mankind and as 
such we always find that those were the most powerful of men who helped man 
in his spiritual needs, because spirituality is the true basis of all our activities in 
life. A spiritually strong and sound man will be strong in every other respect, if 
he so wishes. Until there is spiritual strength in man even physical needs cannot 
be well satisfied. Next to spiritual comes intellectual help. The gift of 
knowledge is a far higher gift than that of food and clothes; it is even higher 
than giving life to a man, because the real life of man consists of knowledge. 
Ignorance is death, knowledge is life. Life is of very little value, if it is a life in 
the dark, groping through ignorance and misery. Next in order comes, of 
course, helping a man physically. Therefore, in considering the question of 
helping others, we must always strive not to commit the mistake of thinking 
that physical help is the only help that can be given. It is not only the last but 
the least, because it cannot bring about permanent satisfaction. The misery that 
I feel when I am hungry is satisfied by eating, but hunger returns; my misery 
can cease only when I am satisfied beyond all want. Then hunger will not make 
me miserable; no distress, no sorrow will be able to move me. So, that help 
which tends to make us strong spiritually is the highest, next to it comes 
intellectual help, and after that physical help. 

The miseries of the world cannot be cured by physical help only. Until man's 






nature changes, these physical needs will always arise, and miseries will always 
be felt, and no amount of physical help will cure them completely. The only 
solution of this problem is to make mankind pure. Ignorance is the mother of all 
the evil and all the misery we see. Let men have light, let them be pure and 
spiritually strong and educated, then alone will misery cease in the world, not 
before. We may convert every house in the country into a charity asylum, we 
may fill the land with hospitals, but the misery of man will still continue to exist 
until man's character changes. 

We read in the Bhagavad-Gita again and again that we must all work 
incessantly. All work is by nature composed of good and evil. We cannot do 
any work which will not do some good somewhere; there cannot be any work 
which will not cause some harm somewhere. Every work must necessarily be a 
mixture of good and evil; yet we are commanded to work incessantly. Good and 
evil will both have their results, will produce their Karma. Good action will 
entail upon us good effect; bad action, bad. But good and bad are both bondages 
of the soul. The solution reached in the Gita in regard to this bondage- 
producing nature of work is that, if we do not attach ourselves to the work we 
do, it will not have any binding effect on our soul. We shall try to understand 
what is meant by this “non-attachment to” to work. 

This is the on central idea in tile Gita: work incessantly, but be not attached to 
it. Samskara can be translated very nearly by "inherent tendency". Using the 
simile of a lake for the mind, every ripple, every wave that rises in the mind, 
when it subsides, does not die out entirely, but leaves a mark and a future 
possibility of that wave coming out again. This mark, with the possibility of the 
wave reappearing, is what is called Samskara. Every work that we do, every 
movement of the body, every thought that we think, leaves such an impression 
on the mind-stuff, and even when such impressions are not obvious on the 
surface, they are sufficiently strong to work beneath the surface, 
subconsciously. What we are every moment is determined by the sum total of 
these impressions on the mind. What I am just at this moment is the effect of 
the sum total of all the impressions of my past life. This is really what is meant 
by character; each man's character is determined by the sum total of these 
impressions. If good impressions prevail, the character becomes good; if bad, it 
becomes bad. If a man continuously hears bad words, thinks bad thoughts, does 


bad actions, his mind will be full of bad impressions; and they will influence his 
thought and work without his being conscious of the fact. In fact, these bad 
impressions are always working, and their resultant must be evil, and that man 
will be a bad man; he cannot help it. The sum total of these impressions in him 
will create the strong motive power for doing bad actions. He will be like a 
machine in the hands of his impressions, and they will force him to do evil. 
Similarly, if a man thinks good thoughts and does good works, the sum total of 
these impressions will be good; and they, in a similar manner, will force him to 
do good even in spite of himself. When a man has done so much good work and 
thought so many good thoughts that there is an irresistible tendency in him to 
do good in spite of himself and even if he wishes to do evil, his mind, as the 
sum total of his tendencies, will not allow him to do so; the tendencies will turn 
him back; he is completely under the influence of the good tendencies. When 
such is the case, a man's good character is said to be established. 

As the tortoise tucks its feet and head inside the shell, and you may kill it and 
break it in pieces, and yet it will not come out, even so the character of that 
man who has control over his motives and organs is unchangeably established. 
He controls his own inner forces, and nothing can draw them out against his 
will. By this continuous reflex of good thoughts, good impressions moving over 
the surface of the mind, the tendency for doing good becomes strong, and as the 
result we feel able to control the Indriyas (the sense-organs, the nerve-centres). 
Thus alone will character be established, then alone a man gets to truth. Such a 
man is safe for ever; he cannot do any evil. You may place him in any 
company, there will be no danger for him. There is a still higher state than 
having this good tendency, and that is the desire for liberation. You must 
remember that freedom of the soul is the goal of all Yogas, and each one 
equally leads to the same result. By work alone men may get to where Buddha 
got largely by meditation or Christ by prayer. Buddha was a working Jnani, 
Christ was a Bhakta, but the same goal was reached by both of them. The 
difficulty is here. Liberation means entire freedom — freedom from the 
bondage of good, as well as from the bondage of evil. A golden chain is as 
much a chain as an iron one. There is a thorn in my finger, and I use another to 
take the first one out; and when I have taken it out, I throw both of them aside; I 
have no necessity for keeping the second thorn, because both are thorns after 
all. So the bad tendencies are to be counteracted by the good ones, and the bad 


impressions on the mind should be removed by the fresh waves of good ones, 
until all that is evil almost disappears, or is subdued and held in control in a 
corner of the mind; but after that, the good tendencies have also to be 
conquered. Thus the "attached" becomes the "unattached". Work, but let not the 
action or the thought produce a deep impression on the mind. Let the ripples 
come and go, let huge actions proceed from the muscles and the brain, but let 
them not make any deep impression on the soul. 

How can this be done? We see that the impression of any action, to which we 
attach ourselves, remains. I may meet hundreds of persons during the day, and 
among them meet also one whom I love; and when I retire at night, I may try to 
think of all the faces I saw, but only that face comes before the mind — the face 
which I met perhaps only for one minute, and which I loved; all the others have 
vanished. My attachment to this particular person caused a deeper impression 
on my mind than all the other faces. Physiologically the impressions have all 
been the same; every one of the faces that I saw pictured itself on the retina, and 
the brain took the pictures in, and yet there was no similarity of effect upon the 
mind. Most of the faces, perhaps, were entirely new faces, about which I had 
never thought before, but that one face of which I got only a glimpse found 
associations inside. Perhaps I had pictured him in my mind for years, knew 
hundreds of things about him, and this one new vision of him awakened 
hundreds of sleeping memories in my mind; and this one impression having 
been repeated perhaps a hundred times more than those of the different faces 
together, will produce a great effect on the mind. 

Therefore, be "unattached"; let things work; let brain centres work; work 
incessantly, but let not a ripple conquer the mind. Work as if you were a 
stranger in this land, a sojourner; work incessantly, but do not bind yourselves; 
bondage is terrible. This world is not our habitation, it is only one of the many 
stages through which we are passing. Remember that great saying of the 
Sankhya, "The whole of nature is for the soul, not the soul for nature." The very 
reason of nature's existence is for the education of the soul; it has no other 
meaning; it is there because the soul must have knowledge, and through 
knowledge free itself. If we remember this always, we shall never be attached to 
nature; we shall know that nature is a book in which we are to read, and that 
when we have gained the required knowledge, the book is of no more value to 


US. Instead of that, however, we are identifying ourselves with nature; we are 
thinking that the soul is for nature, that the spirit is for the flesh, and, as the 
common saying has it, we think that man "lives to eat" and not "eats to live". 

We are continually making this mistake; we are regarding nature as ourselves 
and are becoming attached to it; and as soon as this attachment comes, there is 
the deep impression on the soul, which binds us down and makes us work not 
from freedom but like slaves. 

The whole gist of this teaching is that you should work like a master and not as 
a slavey work incessantly, but do not do slave's work. Do you not see how 
everybody works? Nobody can be altogether at rest; ninety-nine per cent of 
mankind work like slaves, and the result is misery; it is all selfish work. Work 
through freedom! Work through love! The word "love" is very difficult to 
understand; love never comes until there is freedom. There is no true love 
possible in the slave. If you buy a slave and tie him down in chains and make 
him work for you, he will work like a drudge, but there will be no love in him. 
So when we ourselves work for the things of the world as slaves, there can be 
no love in us, and our work is not true work. This is true of work done for 
relatives and friends, and is true of work done for our own selves. Selfish work 
is slave's work; and here is a test. Every act of love brings happiness; there is no 
act of love which does not bring peace and blessedness as its reaction. Real 
existence, real knowledge, and real love are eternally connected with one 
another, the three in one: where one of them is, the others also must be; they are 
the three aspects of the One without a second — the Existence - Knowledge - 
Bliss. When that existence becomes relative, we see it as the world; that 
knowledge becomes in its turn modified into the knowledge of the things of the 
world; and that bliss forms the foundation of all true love known to the heart of 
man. Therefore true love can never react so as to cause pain either to the lover 
or to the beloved. Suppose a man loves a woman; he wishes to have her all to 
himself and feels extremely jealous about her every movement; he wants her to 
sit near him, to stand near him, and to eat and move at his bidding. He is a slave 
to her and wishes to have her as his slave. That is not love; it is a kind of 
morbid affection of the slave, insinuating itself as love. It cannot be love, 
because it is painful; if she does not do what he wants, it brings him pain. With 
love there is no painful reaction; love only brings a reaction of bliss; if it does 
not, it is not love; it is mistaking something else for love. When you have 


succeeded in loving your husband, your wife, your children, the whole world, 
the universe, in such a manner that there is no reaction of pain or jealousy, no 
selfish feeling, then you are in a fit state to be unattached. 

Krishna says, "Look at Me, Arjuna! If I stop from work for one moment, the 
whole universe will die. I have nothing to gain from work; I am the one Lord, 
but why do I work? Because I love the world." God is unattached because He 
loves; that real love makes us unattached. Wherever there is attachment, the 
clinging to the things of the world, you must know that it is all physical 
attraction between sets of particles of matter - something that attracts two 
bodies nearer and nearer all the time and, if they cannot get near enough, 
produces pain; but where there is real love, it does not rest on physical 
attachment at all. Such lovers may be a thousand miles away from one another, 
but their love will be all the same; it does not die, and will never produce any 
painful reaction. 

To attain this unattachment is almost a life-work, but as soon as we have 
reached this point, we have attained the goal of love and become free; the 
bondage of nature falls from us, and we see nature as she is; she forges no more 
chains for us; we stand entirely free and take not the results of work into 
consideration; who then cares for what the results may be? 

Do you ask anything from your children in return for what you have given 
them? It is your duty to work for them, and there the matter ends. In whatever 
you do for a particular person, a city, or a state, assume the same attitude 
towards it as you have towards your children — expect nothing in return. If you 
can invariably take the position of a giver, in which everything given by you is 
a free offering to the world, without any thought of return, then will your work 
bring you no attachment. Attachment comes only where we expect a return. 

If working like slaves results in selfishness and attachment, working as master 
of our own mind gives rise to the bliss of non-attachment. We often talk of right 
and justice, but we find that in the world right and justice are mere baby's talk. 
There are two things which guide the conduct of men: might and mercy. The 
exercise of might is invariably the exercise of selfishness. All men and women 
try to make the most of whatever power or advantage they have. Mercy is 



heaven itself; to be good, we have all to be merciful. Even justice and right 
should stand on mercy. All thought of obtaining return for the work we do 
hinders our spiritual progress; nay, in the end it brings misery. There is another 
way in which this idea of mercy and selfless charity can be put into practice; 
that is, by looking upon work as "worship" in case we believe in a Personal 
God. Here we give up all the fruits our work unto the Lord, and worshipping 
Him thus, we have no right to expect anything from man kind for the work we 
do. The Lord Himself works incessantly and is ever without attachment. Just as 
water cannot wet the lotus leaf, so work cannot bind the unselfish man by 
giving rise to attachment to results. The selfless and unattached man may live in 
the very heart of a crowded and sinful city; he will not be touched by sin. 

This idea of complete self-sacrifice is illustrated in the following story: After 
the battle of Kurukshetra the five Pandava brothers performed a great sacrifice 
and made very large gifts to the poor. All people expressed amazement at the 
greatness and richness of the sacrifice, and said that such a sacrifice the world 
had never seen before. But, after the ceremony, there came a little mongoose, 
half of whose body was golden, and the other half brown; and he began to roll 
on the floor of the sacrificial hall. He said to those around, "You are all liars; 
this is no sacrifice." "What!" they exclaimed, "you say this is no sacrifice; do 
you not know how money and jewels were poured out to the poor and every one 
became rich and happy? This was the most wonderful sacrifice any man ever 
performed." But the mongoose said, "There was once a little village, and in it 
there dwelt a poor Brahmin with his wife, his son, and his son's wife. They were 
very poor and lived on small gifts made to them for preaching and teaching. 
There came in that land a three years' famine, and the poor Brahmin suffered 
more than ever. At last when the family had starved for days, the father brought 
home one morning a little barley flour, which he had been fortunate enough to 
obtain, and he divided it into four parts, one for each member of the family. 
They prepared it for their meal, and just as they were about to eat, there was a 
knock at the door. The father opened it, and there stood a guest. Now in India a 
guest is a sacred person; he is as a god for the time being, and must be treated as 
such. So the poor Brahmin said, 'Come in, sir; you are welcome,' He set before 
the guest his own portion of the food, which the guest quickly ate and said, 'Oh, 
sir, you have killed me; I have been starving for ten days, and this little bit has 
but increased my hunger.' Then the wife said to her husband, 'Give him my 


share,' but the husband said, 'Not so.' The wife however insisted, saying, 'Here 
is a poor man, and it is our duty as householders to see that he is fed, and it is 
my duty as a wife to give him my portion, seeing that you have no more to offer 
him.' Then she gave her share to the guest, which he ate, and said he was still 
burning with hunger. So the son said, 'Take my portion also; it is the duty of a 
son to help his father to fulfil his obligations.' The guest ate that, but remained 
still unsatisfied; so the son's wife gave him her portion also. That was sufficient, 
and the guest departed, blessing them. That night those four people died of 
starvation. A few granules of that flour had fallen on the floor; and when I 
rolled my body on them, half of it became golden, as you see. Since then I have 
been travelling all over the world, hoping to find another sacrifice like that, but 
nowhere have I found one; nowhere else has the other half of my body been 
turned into gold. That is why I say this is no sacrifice." 

This idea of charity is going out of India; great men are becoming fewer and 
fewer. When I was first learning English, I read an English story book in which 
there was a story about a dutiful boy who had gone out to work and had given 
some of his money to his old mother, and this was praised in three or four 
pages. What was that? No Hindu boy can ever understand the moral of that 
story. Now I understand it when I hear the Western idea — every man for 
himself. And some men take everything for themselves, and fathers and 
mothers and wives and children go to the wall. That should never and nowhere 
be the ideal of the householder. 

Now you see what Karma-Yoga means; even at the point of death to help any 
one, without asking questions. Be cheated millions of times and never ask a 
question, and never think of what you are doing. Never vaunt of your gifts to 
the poor or expect their gratitude, but rather be grateful to them for giving you 
the occasion of practicing charity to them. Thus it is plain that to be an ideal 
householder is a much more difficult task than to be an ideal Sannyasin; the true 
life of work is indeed as hard as, if not harder than, the equally true life of 
renunciation. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER IV 
WHAT IS DUTY? 

It is necessary in the study of Karma-Yoga to know what duty is. If I have to do 
something I must first know that it is my duty, and then I can do it. The idea of 
duty again is different in different nations. The Mohammedan says what is 
written in his book, the Koran, is his duty; the Hindu says what is in the Vedas 
is his duty; and the Christian says what is in the Bible is his duty. We find that 
there are varied ideas of duty, differing according to different states in life, 
different historical periods and different nations. The term "duty", like every 
other universal abstract term, is impossible clearly to define; we can only get an 
idea of it by knowing its practical operations and results. When certain things 
occur before us, we have all a natural or trained impulse to act in a certain 
manner towards them; when this impulse comes, the mind begins to think 
about the situation. Sometimes it thinks that it is good to act in a particular 
manner under the given conditions; at other times it thinks that it is wrong to 
act in the same manner even in the very same circumstances. The ordinary idea 
of duty everywhere is that every good man follows the dictates of his 
conscience. But what is it that makes an act a duty? If a Christian finds a piece 
of beef before him and does not eat it to save his own life, or will not give it to 
save the life of another man, he is sure to feel that he has not done his duty. But 
if a Hindu dares to eat that piece of beef or to give it to another Hindu, he is 
equally sure to feel that he too has not done his duty; the Hindu's training and 
education make him feel that way. In the last century there were notorious 
bands of robbers in India called thugs; they thought it their duty to kill any man 
they could and take away his money; the larger the number of men they killed, 
the better they thought they were. Ordinarily if a man goes out into the street 
and shoots down another man, he is apt to feel sorry for it, thinking that he has 
done wrong. But if the very same man, as a soldier in his regiment, kills not 
one but twenty, he is certain to feel glad and think that he has done his duty 
remarkably well. Therefore we see that it is not the thing done that defines a 
duty. To give an objective definition of duty is thus entirely impossible. Yet 
there is duty from the subjective side. Any action that makes us go Godward is 






a good action, and is our duty; any action that makes us go downward is evil, 
and is not our duty. From the subjective standpoint we may see that certain acts 
have a tendency to exalt and ennoble us, while certain other acts have a 
tendency to degrade and to brutalise us. But it is not possible to make out with 
certainty which acts have which kind of tendency in relation to all persons, of 
all sorts and conditions. There is, however, only one idea of duty which has 
been universally accepted by all mankind, of all ages and sects and countries, 
and that has been summed up in a Sanskrit aphorism thus: “Do not injure any 
being; not injuring any being is virtue, injuring any being is sin.” 

The Bhagavad-Gita frequently alludes to duties dependent upon birth and 
position in life. Birth and position in life and in society largely determine the 
mental and moral attitude of individuals towards the various activities of life. It 
is therefore our duty to do that work which will exalt and ennoble us in 
accordance with the ideals and activities of the society in which we are born. 
But it must be particularly remembered that the same ideals and activities do 
not prevail in all societies and countries; our ignorance of this is the main cause 
of much of the hatred of one nation towards another. An American thinks that 
whatever an American does in accordance with the custom of his country is the 
best thing to do, and that whoever does not follow his custom must be a very 
wicked man. A Hindu thinks that his customs are the only right ones and are 
the best in the world, and that whosoever does not obey them must be the most 
wicked man living. This is quite a natural mistake which all of us are apt to 
make. But it is very harmful; it is the cause of half the uncharitableness found 
in the world. When I came to this country and was going through the Chicago 
Fair, a man from behind pulled at my turban. I looked back and saw that he was 
a very gentlemanly-looking man, neatly dressed. I spoke to him; and when he 
found that I knew English, he became very much abashed. On another occasion 
in the same Fair another man gave me a push. When I asked him the reason, he 
also was ashamed and stammered out an apology saying, "Why do you dress 
that way?" The sympathies of these men were limited within the range of their 
own language and their own fashion of dress. Much of the oppression of 
powerful nations on weaker ones is caused by this prejudice. It dries up their 
fellow feeling for fellow men. That very man who asked me why I did not 
dress as he did and wanted to ill-treat me because of my dress may have been a 
very good man, a good father, and a good citizen; but the kindliness of his 


nature died out as soon as he saw a man in a different dress. Strangers are 
exploited in all countries, because they do not know how to defend themselves; 
thus they carry home false impressions of the peoples they have seen. Sailors, 
soldiers, and traders behave in foreign lands in very queer ways, although they 
would not dream of doing so in their own country; perhaps this is why the 
Chinese call Europeans and Americans "foreign devils". They could not have 
done this if they had met the good, the kindly sides of Western life. 

Therefore the one point we ought to remember is that we should always try to 
see the duty of others through their own eyes, and never judge the customs of 
other peoples by our own standard. I am not the standard of the universe. I have 
to accommodate myself to the world, and not the world to me. So we see that 
environments change the nature of our duties, and doing the duty which is ours 
at any particular time is the best thing we can do in this world. Let us do that 
duty which is ours by birth; and when we have done that, let us do the duty 
which is ours by our position in life and in society. There is, however, one great 
danger in human nature, viz that man never examines himself. He thinks he is 
quite as fit to be on the throne as the king. Even if he is, he must first show that 
he has done the duty of his own position; and then higher duties will come to 
him. When we begin to work earnestly in the world, nature gives us blows right 
and left and soon enables us to find out our position. No man can long occupy 
satisfactorily a position for which he is not fit. There is no use in grumbling 
against nature's adjustment. He who does the lower work is not therefore a 
lower man. No man is to be judged by the mere nature of his duties, but all 
should be judged by the manner and the spirit in which they perform them. 

Later on we shall find that even this idea of duty undergoes change, and that 
the greatest work is done only when there is no selfish motive to prompt it. Yet 
it is work through the sense of duty that leads us to work without any idea of 
duty; when work will become worship — nay, something higher — then will 
work be done for its own sake. We shall find that the philosophy of duty, 
whether it be in the form of ethics or of love, is the same as in every other 
Yoga — the object being the attenuating of the lower self, so that the real 
higher Self may shine forth — the lessening of the frittering away of energies 
on the lower plane of existence, so that the soul may manifest itself on the 
higher ones. This is accomplished by the continuous denial of low desires. 






which duty rigorously requires. The whole organisation of society has thus 
been developed, consciously or unconsciously, in the realms of action and 
experience, where, by limiting selfishness, we open the way to an unlimited 
expansion of the real nature of man. 

Duty is seldom sweet. It is only when love greases its wheels that it runs 
smoothly; it is a continuous friction otherwise. How else could parents do their 
duties to their children, husbands to their wives, and vice versa? Do we not 
meet with cases of friction every day in our lives? Duty is sweet only through 
love, and love shines in freedom alone. Yet is it freedom to be a slave to the 
senses, to anger, to jealousies and a hundred other petty things that must occur 
every day in human life? In all these little roughnesses that we meet with in 
life, the highest expression of freedom is to forbear. Women, slaves to their 
own irritable, jealous tempers, are apt to blame their husbands, and assert their 
own "freedom", as they think, not knowing that thereby they only prove that 
they are slaves. So it is with husbands who eternally find fault with their wives. 

Chastity is the first virtue in man or woman, and the man who, however he may 
have strayed away, cannot be brought to the right path by a gentle and loving 
and chaste wife is indeed very rare. The world is not yet as bad as that. We hear 
much about brutal husbands all over the world and about the impurity of men, 
but is it not true that there are quite as many brutal and impure women as men? 
If all women were as good and pure as their own constant assertions would lead 
one to believe, I am perfectly satisfied that there would not be one impure man 
in the world. What brutality is there which purity and chastity cannot conquer? 
A good, chaste wife, who thinks of every other man except her own husband as 
her child and has the attitude of a mother towards all men, will grow so great in 
the power of her purity that there cannot be a single man, however brutal, who 
will not breathe an atmosphere of holiness in her presence. Similarly, every 
husband must look upon all women, except his own wife, in the light of his 
own mother or daughter or sister. That man, again, who wants to be a teacher 
of religion must look upon every woman as his mother, and always behave 
towards her as such. 

The position of the mother is the highest in the world, as it is the one place in 
which to learn and exercise the greatest unselfishness. The love of God is the 


only love that is higher than a mother's love; all others are lower. It is the duty 
of the mother to think of her children first and then of herself. But, instead of 
that, if the parents are always thinking of themselves first, the result is that the 
relation between parents and children becomes the same as that between birds 
and their offspring which, as soon as they are fledged, do not recognise any 
parents. Blessed, indeed, is the man who is able to look upon woman as the 
representative of the motherhood of God. Blessed, indeed, is the woman to 
whom man represents the fatherhood of God. Blessed are the children who 
look upon their parents as Divinity manifested on earth. 

The only way to rise is by doing the duty next to us, and thus gathering strength 
go on until we reach the highest state. A young Sannyasin went to a forest; 
there he meditated, worshipped, and practiced Yoga for a long time. After 
years of hard work and practice, he was one day sitting under a tree, when 
some dry leaves fell upon his head. He looked up and saw a crow and a crane 
fighting on the top of the tree, which made him very angry. He said, "What! 
Dare you throw these dry leaves upon my head!" As with these words he 
angrily glanced at them, a flash of fire went out of his head — such was the 
Yogi's power — and burnt the birds to ashes. He was very glad, almost 
overjoyed at this development of power — he could burn the crow and the 
crane by a look. After a time he had to go to the town to beg his bread. He 
went, stood at a door, and said, "Mother, give me food." A voice came from 
inside the house, "Wait a little, my son." The young man thought, "You 
wretched woman, how dare you make me wait! You do not know my power 
yet." While he was thinking thus the voice came again: "Boy, don't be thinking 
too much of yourself. Here is neither crow nor crane." He was astonished; still 
he had to wait. At last the woman came, and he fell at her feet and said, 
"Mother, how did you know that?" She said, "My boy, I do not know your 
Yoga or your practices. I am a common everyday woman. I made you wait 
because my husband is ill, and I was nursing him. All my life I have struggled 
to do my duty. When I was unmarried, I did my duty to my parents; now that I 
am married, I do my duty to my husband; that is all the Yoga I practice. But by 
doing my duty I have become illumined; thus I could read your thoughts and 
know what you had done in the forest. If you want to know something higher 
than this, go to the market of such and such a town where you will find a 
VyMha (The lowest class of people in India who used to live as hunters and butchers.) who 





will tell you something that you will be very glad to learn." The Sannyasin 
thought, "Why should I go to that town and to a Vyadha?" But after what he 
had seen, his mind opened a little, so he went. When he came near the town, he 
found the market and there saw, at a distance, a big fat Vyadha cutting meat 
with big knives, talking and bargaining with different people. The young man 
said, "Lord help me! Is this the man from whom I am going to learn? He is the 
incarnation of a demon, if he is anything." In the meantime this man looked up 
and said, "O Swami, did that lady send you here? Take a seat until I have done 
my business." The Sannyasin thought, "What comes to me here?" He took his 
seat; the man went on with his work, and after he had finished he took his 
money and said to the Sannyasin, "Come sir, come to my home." On reaching 
home the Vyadha gave him a seat, saying, "Wait here," and went into the 
house. He then washed his old father and mother, fed them, and did all he could 
to please them, after which he came to the Sannyasin and said, "Now, sir, you 
have come here to see me; what can I do for you?" The Sannyasin asked him a 
few questions about soul and about God, and the Vyadha gave him a lecture 
which forms a part of the Mahabharata, called the Vyddha-Gitd. It contains one 
of the highest flights of the Vedanta. When the Vyadha finished his teaching, 
the Sannyasin felt astonished. He said, "Why are you in that body? With such 
knowledge as yours why are you in a Vyadha's body, and doing such filthy, 
ugly work?" "My son," replied the Vyadha, "no duty is ugly, no duty is impure. 
My birth placed me in these circumstances and environments. In my boyhood I 
learnt the trade; I am unattached, and I try to do my duty well. I try to do my 
duty as a householder, and I try to do all I can to make my father and mother 
happy. I neither know your Yoga, nor have I become a Sannyasin, nor did I go 
out of the world into a forest; nevertheless, all that you have heard and seen has 
come to me through the unattached doing of the duty which belongs to my 
position." 

There is a sage in India, a great Yogi, one of the most wonderful men I have 
ever seen in my life. He is a peculiar man, he will not teach any one; if you ask 
him a question he will not answer. It is too much for him to take up the position 
of a teacher, he will not do it. If you ask a question, and wait for some days, in 
the course of conversation he will bring up the subject, and wonderful light will 
he throw on it. He told me once the secret of work, "Let the end and the means 
be joined into one." When you are doing any work, do not think of anything 


beyond. Do it as worship, as the highest worship, and devote your whole life to 
it for the time being. Thus, in the story, the Vyadha and the woman did their 
duty with cheerfulness and whole-heartedness; and the result was that they 
became illuminated, clearly showing that the right performance of the duties of 
any station in life, without attachment to results, leads us to the highest 
realisation of the perfection of the soul. 

It is the worker who is attached to results that grumbles about the nature of the 
duty which has fallen to his lot; to the unattached worker all duties are equally 
good, and form efficient instruments with which selfishness and sensuality may 
be killed, and the freedom of the soul secured. We are all apt to think too 
highly of ourselves. Our duties are determined by our deserts to a much larger 
extent than we are willing to grant. Competition rouses envy, and it kills the 
kindliness of the heart. To the grumbler all duties are distasteful; nothing will 
ever satisfy him, and his whole life is doomed to prove a failure. Let us work 
on, doing as we go whatever happens to be our duty, and being ever ready to 
put our shoulders to the wheel. Then surely shall we see the Light! 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER V 

WE HELP OURSELVES, NOT THE WORLD 

Before considering further how devotion to duty helps us in our spiritual 
progress, let me place before you in a brief compass another aspect of what we 
in India mean by Karma. In every religion there are three parts: philosophy, 
mythology, and ritual. Philosophy of course is the essence of every religion; 
mythology explains and illustrates it by means of the more or less legendary 
lives of great men, stories and fables of wonderful things, and so on; ritual 
gives to that philosophy a still more concrete form, so that every one may grasp 
it — ritual is in fact concretised philosophy. This ritual is Karma; it is 
necessary in every religion, because most of us cannot understand abstract 
spiritual things until we grow much spiritually. It is easy for men to think that 
they can understand anything; but when it comes to practical experience, they 
find that abstract ideas are often very hard to comprehend. Therefore symbols 
are of great help, and we cannot dispense with the symbolical method of 
putting things before us. From time immemorial symbols have been used by all 
kinds of religions. In one sense we cannot think but in symbols; words 
themselves are symbols of thought. In another sense everything in the universe 
may be looked upon as a symbol. The whole universe is a symbol, and God is 
the essence behind. This kind of symbology is not simply the creation of man; 
it is not that certain people belonging to a religion sit down together and think 
out certain symbols, and bring them into existence out of their own minds. The 
symbols of religion have a natural growth. Otherwise, why is it that certain 
symbols are associated with certain ideas in the mind of almost every one? 
Certain symbols are universally prevalent. Many of you may think that the 
cross first came into existence as a symbol in connection with the Christian 
religion, but as a matter of fact it existed before Christianity was, before Moses 
was born, before the Vedas were given out, before there was any human record 
of human things. The cross may be found to have been in existence among the 
Aztecs and the Phoenicians; every race seems to have had the cross. Again, the 
symbol of the crucified Saviour, of a man crucified upon a cross, appears to 
have been known to almost every nation. The circle has been a great symbol 







throughout the world. Then there is the most universal of all symbols, the 
Swastika. At one time it was thought that the Buddhists carried it all over the 
world with them, but it has been found out that ages before 
Buddhism it was used among nations. In Old Babylon and in Egypt 
it was to be found. What does this show? All these symbols could 
not have been purely conventional. There must be some reason for 
them; some natural association between them and the human mind. Language 
is not the result of convention; it is not that people ever agreed to represent 
certain ideas by certain words; there never was an idea without a corresponding 
word or a word without a corresponding idea; ideas and words are in their 
nature inseparable. The symbols to represent ideas may be sound symbols or 
colour symbols. Deaf and dumb people have to think with other than sound 
symbols. Every thought in the mind has a form as its counterpart. This is called 
in Sanskrit philosophy Nama-Rupa — name and form. It is as impossible to 
create by convention a system of symbols as it is to create a language. In the 
world's ritualistic symbols we have an expression of the religious thought of 
humanity. It is easy to say that there is no use of rituals and temples and all 
such paraphernalia; every baby says that in modern times. But it must be easy 
for all to see that those who worship inside a temple are in many respects 
different from those who will not worship there. Therefore the association of 
particular temples, rituals, and other concrete forms with particular religions 
has a tendency to bring into the minds of the followers of those religions the 
thoughts for which those concrete things stand as symbols; and it is not wise to 
ignore rituals and symbology altogether. The study and practice of these things 
form naturally a part of Karma-Yoga. 

There are many other aspects of this science of work. One among them is to 
know the relation between thought and word and what can be achieved by the 
power of the word. In every religion the power of the word is recognised, so 
much so that in some of them creation itself is said to have come out of the 
word. The external aspect of the thought of God is the Word, and as God 
thought and willed before He created, creation came out of the Word. In this 
stress and hurry of our materialistic life, our nerves lose sensibility and become 
hardened. The older we grow, the longer we are knocked about in the world, 
the more callous we become; and we are apt to neglect things that even happen 
persistently and prominently around us. Human nature, however, asserts itself 



sometimes, and we are led to inquire into and wonder at some of these common 
occurrences; wondering thus is the first step in the acquisition of light. Apart 
from the higher philosophic and religious value of the Word, we may see that 
sound symbols play a prominent part in the drama of human life. I am talking 
to you. I am not touching you; the pulsations of the air caused by my speaking 
go into your ear, they touch your nerves and produce effects in your minds. 

You cannot resist this. What can be more wonderful than this? One man calls 
another a fool, and at this the other stands up and clenches his fist and lands a 
blow on his nose. Look at the power of the word! There is a woman weeping 
and miserable; another woman comes along and speaks to her a few gentle 
words, the doubled up frame of the weeping woman becomes straightened at 
once, her sorrow is gone and she already begins to smile. Think of the power of 
words! They are a great force in higher philosophy as well as in common life. 
Day and night we manipulate this force without thought and without inquiry. 

To know the nature of this force and to use it well is also a part of Karma- 
Yoga. 

Our duty to others means helping others; doing good to the world. Why should 
we do good to the world? Apparently to help the world, but really to help 
ourselves. We should always try to help the world, that should be the highest 
motive in us; but if we consider well, we find that the world does not require 
our help at all. This world was not made that you or I should come and help it. I 
once read a sermon in which it was said, "All this beautiful world is very good, 
because it gives us time and opportunity to help others." Apparently, this is a 
very beautiful sentiment, but is it not a blasphemy to say that the world needs 
our help? We cannot deny that there is much misery in it; to go out and help 
others is, therefore, the best thing we can do, although in the long run, we shall 
find that helping others is only helping ourselves. As a boy I had some white 
mice. They were kept in a little box in which there were little wheels, and when 
the mice tried to cross the wheels, the wheels turned and turned, and the mice 
never got anywhere. So it is with the world and our helping it. The only help is 
that we get moral exercise. This world is neither good nor evil; each man 
manufactures a world for himself. If a blind man begins to think of the world, it 
is either as soft or hard, or as cold or hot. We are a mass of happiness or 
misery; we have seen that hundreds of times in our lives. As a rule, the young 
are optimistic and the old pessimistic. The young have life before them; the old 


complain their day is gone; hundreds of desires, which they cannot fulfil 
struggle in their hearts. Both are foolish nevertheless. Life is good or evil 
according to the state of mind in which we look at it, it is neither by itself. Fire, 
by itself, is neither good nor evil. When it keeps us warm we say, "How 
beautiful is fire!" When it burns our fingers, we blame it. Still, in itself it is 
neither good nor bad. According as we use it, it produces in us the feeling of 
good or bad; so also is this world. It is perfect. By perfection is meant that it is 
perfectly fitted to meet its ends. We may all be perfectly sure that it will go on 
beautifully well without us, and we need not bother our heads wishing to help 
it. 

Yet we must do good; the desire to do good is the highest motive power we 
have, if we know all the time that it is a privilege to help others. Do not stand 
on a high pedestal and take five cents in your hand and say, "Here, my poor 
man," but be grateful that the poor man is there, so that by making a gift to him 
you are able to help yourself. It is not the receiver that is blessed, but it is the 
giver. Be thankful that you are allowed to exercise your power of benevolence 
and mercy in the world, and thus become pure and perfect. All good acts tend 
to make us pure and perfect. What can we do at best? Build a hospital, make 
roads, or erect charity asylums. We may organise a charity and collect two or 
three millions of dollars, build a hospital with one million, with the second give 
balls and drink champagne, and of the third let the officers steal half, and leave 
the rest finally to reach the poor; but what are all these? One mighty wind in 
five minutes can break all your buildings up. What shall we do then? One 
volcanic eruption may sweep away all our roads and hospitals and cities and 
buildings. Let us give up all this foolish talk of doing good to the world. It is 
not waiting for your or my help; yet we must work and constantly do good, 
because it is a blessing to ourselves. That is the only way we can become 
perfect. No beggar whom we have helped has ever owed a single cent to us; we 
owe everything to him, because he has allowed us to exercise our charity on 
him. It is entirely wrong to think that we have done, or can do, good to the 
world, or to think that we have helped such and such people. It is a foolish 
thought, and all foolish thoughts bring misery. We think that we have helped 
some man and expect him to thank us, and because he does not, unhappiness 
comes to us. Why should we expect anything in return for what we do? Be 
grateful to the man you help, think of him as God. Is it not a great privilege to 


be allowed to worship God by helping our fellow men? If we were really 
unattached, we should escape all this pain of vain expectation, and could 
cheerfully do good work in the world. Never will unhappiness or misery come 
through work done without attachment. The world will go on with its happiness 
and misery through eternity. 

There was a poor man who wanted some money; and somehow he had heard 
that if he could get hold of a ghost, he might command him to bring money or 
anything else he liked; so he was very anxious to get hold of a ghost. He went 
about searching for a man who would give him a ghost, and at last he found a 
sage with great powers, and besought his help. The sage asked him what he 
would do with a ghost. I want a ghost to work for me; teach me how to get hold 
of one, sir; I desire it very much," replied the man. But the sage said, "Don't 
disturb yourself, go home." The next day the man went again to the sage and 
began to weep and pray, "Give me a ghost; I must have a ghost, sir, to help 
me." At last the sage was disgusted, and said, "Take this charm, repeat this 
magic word, and a ghost will come, and whatever you say to him he will do. 
But beware; they are terrible beings, and must be kept continually busy. If you 
fail to give him work, he will take your life." The man replied, "That is easy; I 
can give him work for all his life." Then he went to a forest, and after long 
repetition of the magic word, a huge ghost appeared before him, and said, "I am 
a ghost. I have been conquered by your magic; but you must keep me 
constantly employed. The moment you fail to give me work I will kill you." 

The man said, "Build me a palace," and the ghost said, "It is done; the palace is 
built." "Bring me money," said the man. "Here is your money," said the ghost. 
"Cut this forest down, and build a city in its place." "That is done," said the 
ghost, "anything more?" Now the man began to be frightened and thought he 
could give him nothing more to do; he did everything in a trice. The ghost said, 
"Give me something to do or I will eat you up." The poor man could find no 
further occupation for him, and was frightened. So he ran and ran and at last 
reached the sage, and said, "Oh, sir, protect my life!" The sage asked him what 
the matter was, and the man replied, "I have nothing to give the ghost to do. 
Everything I tell him to do he does in a moment, and he threatens to eat me up 
if I do not give him work." Just then the ghost arrived, saying, "I'll eat you up," 
and he would have swallowed the man. The man began to shake, and begged 
the sage to save his life. The sage said, "I will find you a way out. Look at that 


dog with a curly tail. Draw your sword quickly and cut the tail off and give it to 
the ghost to straighten out." The man cut off the dog's tail and gave it to the 
ghost, saying, "Straighten that out for me." The ghost took it and slowly and 
carefully straightened it out, but as soon as he let it go, it instantly curled up 
again. Once more he laboriously straightened it out, only to find it again curled 
up as soon as he attempted to let go of it. Again he patiently straightened it out, 
but as soon as he let it go, it curled up again. So he went on for days and days, 
until he was exhausted and said, "I was never in such trouble before in my life. 

I am an old veteran ghost, but never before was I in such trouble." "I will make 
a compromise with you ;" he said to the man, "you let me off and I will let you 
keep all I have given you and will promise not to harm you." The man was 
much pleased, and accepted the offer gladly. 

This world is like a dog's curly tail, and people have been striving to straighten 
it out for hundreds of years; but when they let it go, it has curled up again. How 
could it be otherwise? One must first know how to work without attachment, 
then one will not be a fanatic. When we know that this world is like a dog's 
curly tail and will never get straightened, we shall not become fanatics. If there 
were no fanaticism in the world, it would make much more progress than it 
does now. It is a mistake to think that fanaticism can make for the progress of 
mankind. On the contrary, it is a retarding element creating hatred and anger, 
and causing people to fight each other, and making them unsympathetic. We 
think that whatever we do or possess is the best in the world, and what we do 
not do or possess is of no value. So, always remember the instance of the curly 
tail of the dog whenever you have a tendency to become a fanatic. You need 
not worry or make yourself sleepless about the world; it will go on without 
you. When you have avoided fanaticism, then alone will you work well. It is 
the level-headed man, the calm man, of good judgment and cool nerves, of 
great sympathy and love, who does good work and so does good to himself. 

The fanatic is foolish and has no sympathy; he can never straighten the world, 
nor himself become pure and perfect. 

To recapitulate the chief points in today's lecture: First, we have to bear in 
mind that we are all debtors to the world and the world does not owe us 
anything. It is a great privilege for all of us to be allowed to do anything for the 
world. In helping the world we really help ourselves. The second point is that 


there is a God in this universe. It is not true that this universe is drifting and 
stands in need of help from you and me. God is ever present therein, He is 
undying and eternally active and infinitely watchful. When the whole universe 
sleeps, He sleeps not; He is working incessantly; all the changes and 
manifestations of the world are His. Thirdly, we ought not to hate anyone. This 
world will always continue to be a mixture of good and evil. Our duty is to 
sympathise with the weak and to love even the wrongdoer. The world is a 
grand moral gymnasium wherein we have all to take exercise so as to become 
stronger and stronger spiritually. Fourthly, we ought not to be fanatics of any 
kind, because fanaticism is opposed to love. You hear fanatics glibly saying, "I 
do not hate the sinner. I hate the sin," but I am prepared to go any distance to 
see the face of that man who can really make a distinction between the sin and 
the sinner. It is easy to say so. If we can distinguish well between quality and 
substance, we may become perfect men. It is not easy to do this. And further, 
the calmer we are and the less disturbed our nerves, the more shall we love and 
the better will our work be. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 

« 

CHAPTER VI 

NON-ATTACHMENT IS COMPLETE SELF-ABNEGATION 

Just as every action that emanates from us comes back to us as reaction, even 
so our actions may act on other people and theirs on us. Perhaps all of you have 
observed it as a fact that when persons do evil actions, they become more and 
more evil, and when they begin to do good, they become stronger and stronger 
and learn to do good at all times. This intensification of the influence of action 
cannot be explained on any other ground than that we can act and react upon 
each other. To take an illustration from physical science, when I am doing a 
certain action, my mind may be said to be in a certain state of vibration; all 
minds which are in similar circumstances will have the tendency to be affected 
by my mind. If there are different musical instruments tuned alike in one room, 
all of you may have noticed that when one is struck, the others have the 
tendency to vibrate so as to give the same note. So all minds that have the same 
tension, so to say, will be equally affected by the same thought. Of course, this 
influence of thought on mind will vary according to distance and other causes, 
but the mind is always open to affection. Suppose I am doing an evil act, my 
mind is in a certain state of vibration, and all minds in the universe, which are 
in a similar state, have the possibility of being affected by the vibration of my 
mind. So, when I am doing a good action, my mind is in another state of 
vibration; and all minds similarly strung have the possibility of being affected 
by my mind; and this power of mind upon mind is more or less according as 
the force of the tension is greater or less. 

Following this simile further, it is quite possible that, just as light waves may 
travel for millions of years before they reach any object, so thought waves may 
also travel hundreds of years before they meet an object with which they 
vibrate in unison. It is quite possible, therefore, that this atmosphere of ours is 
full of such thought pulsations, both good and evil. Every thought projected 
from every brain goes on pulsating, as it were, until it meets a fit object that 
will receive it. Any mind which is open to receive some of these impulses will 
take them immediately. So, when a man is doing evil actions, he has brought 






his mind to a certain state of tension and all the waves which correspond to that 
state of tension, and which may be said to be already in the atmosphere, will 
struggle to enter into his mind. That is why an evil-doer generally goes on 
doing more and more evil. His actions become intensified. Such, also will be 
the case with the doer of good; he will open himself to all the good waves that 
are in the atmosphere, and his good actions also will become intensified. We 
run, therefore, a twofold danger in doing evil: first, we open ourselves to all the 
evil influences surrounding us; secondly, we create evil which affects others, 
may be hundreds of years hence. In doing evil we injure ourselves and others 
also. In doing good we do good to ourselves and to others as well; and, like all 
other forces in man, these forces of good and evil also gather strength from 
outside. 

According to Karma-Yoga, the action one has done cannot be destroyed until it 
has borne its fruit; no power in nature can stop it from yielding its results. If I 
do an evil action, I must suffer for it; there is no power in this universe to stop 
or stay it. Similarly, if I do a good action, there is no power in the universe 
which can stop its bearing good results. The cause must have its effect; nothing 
can prevent or restrain this. Now comes a very fine and serious question about 
Karma-Yoga — namely, that these actions of ours, both good and evil, are 
intimately connected with each other. We cannot put a line of demarcation and 
say, this action is entirely good and this entirely evil. There is no action which 
does not bear good and evil fruits at the same time. To take the nearest 
example: I am talking to you, and some of you, perhaps, think I am doing good; 
and at the same time I am, perhaps, killing thousands of microbes in the 
atmosphere; I am thus doing evil to something else. When it is very near to us 
and affects those we know, we say that it is very good action if it affects them 
in a good manner. For instance, you may call my speaking to you very good, 
but the microbes will not; the microbes you do not see, but yourselves you do 
see. The way in which my talk affects you is obvious to you, but how it affects 
the microbes is not so obvious. And so, if we analyse our evil actions also, we 
may find that some good possibly results from them somewhere. He who in 
good action sees that there is something evil in it, and in the midst of evil sees 
that there is something good in it somewhere, has known the secret of work. 

But what follows from it? That, howsoever we may try, there cannot be any 



action which is perfectly pure, or any which is perfectly impure, taking purity 
and impurity in the sense of injury and non-injury. We cannot breathe or live 
without injuring others, and every bit of the food we eat is taken away from 
another’s mouth. Our very lives are crowding out other lives. It may be men, or 
animals, or small microbes, but some one or other of these we have to crowd 
out. That being the case, it naturally follows that perfection can never be 
attained by work. We may work through all eternity, but there will be no way 
out of this intricate maze. You may work on, and on, and on; there will be no 
end to this inevitable association of good and evil in the results of work. 

The second point to consider is, what is the end of work? We find the vast 
majority of people in every country believing that there will be a time when 
this world will become perfect, when there will be no disease, nor death, nor 
unhappiness, nor wickedness. That is a very good idea, a very good motive 
power to inspire and uplift the ignorant; but if we think for a moment, we shall 
find on the very face of it that it cannot be so. How can it be, seeing that good 
and evil are the obverse and reverse of the same coin? How can you have good 
without evil at the same time? What is meant by perfection? A perfect life is a 
contradiction in terms. Life itself is a state of continuous struggle between 
ourselves and everything outside. Every moment we are fighting actually with 
external nature, and if we are defeated, our life has to go. It is, for instance, a 
continuous struggle for food and air. If food or air fails, we die. Life is not a 
simple and smoothly flowing thing, but it is a compound effect. This complex 
struggle between something inside and the external world is what we call life. 
So it is clear that when this struggle ceases, there will be an end of life. 

What is meant by ideal happiness is the cessation of this struggle. But then life 
will cease, for the struggle can only cease when life itself has ceased. We have 
seen already that in helping the world we help ourselves. The main effect of 
work done for others is to purify ourselves. By means of the constant effort to 
do good to others we are trying to forget ourselves; this forgetfulness of self is 
the one great lesson we have to learn in life. Man thinks foolishly that he can 
make himself happy, and after years of struggle finds out at last that true 
happiness consists in killing selfishness and that no one can make him happy 
except himself. Every act of charity, every thought of sympathy, every action 
of help, every good deed, is taking so much of self-importance away from our 


little selves and making us think of ourselves as the lowest and the least, and, 
therefore, it is all good. Here we find that Jnana, Bhakti, and Karma — all 
come to one point. The highest ideal is eternal and entire self-abnegation, 
where there is no "I," but all is "Thou"; and whether he is conscious or 
unconscious of it. Karma-Yoga leads man to that end. A religious preacher may 
become horrified at the idea of an Impersonal God; he may insist on a Personal 
God and wish to keep up his own identity and individuality, whatever he may 
mean by that. But his ideas of ethics, if they are really good, cannot but be 
based on the highest self-abnegation. It is the basis of all morality; you may 
extend it to men, or animals, or angels, it is the one basic idea, the one 
fundamental principle running through all ethical systems. 

You will find various classes of men in this world. First, there are the God- 
men, whose self-abnegation is complete, and who do only good to others even 
at the sacrifice of their own lives. These are the highest of men. If there are a 
hundred of such in any country, that country need never despair. But they are 
unfortunately too few. Then there are the good men who do good to others so 
long as it does not injure themselves. And there is a third class who, to do good 
to themselves, injure others. It is said by a Sanskrit poet that there is a fourth 
unnamable class of people who injure others merely for injury's sake. Just as 
there are at one pole of existence the highest good men, who do good for the 
sake of doing good, so, at the other pole, there are others who injure others just 
for the sake of the injury. They do not gain anything thereby, but it is their 
nature to do evil. 

Here are two Sanskrit words. The one is Pravritti, which means revolving 
towards, and the other is Nivritti, which means revolving away. The "revolving 
towards" is what we call the world, the "I and mine”; it includes all those things 
which are always enriching that "me" by wealth and money and power, and 
name and fame, and which are of a grasping nature, always tending to 
accumulate everything in one centre, that centre being "myself". That is the 
Pravritti, the natural tendency of every human being; taking everything from 
everywhere and heaping it around one centre, that centre being man's own 
sweet self. When this tendency begins to break, when it is Nivritti or "going 
away from," then begin morality and religion. Both Pravritti and Nivritti are of 
the nature of work: the former is evil work, and the latter is good work. This 


Nivritti is the fundamental basis of all morality and all religion, and the very 
perfection of it is entire self-abnegation, readiness to sacrifice mind and body 
and everything for another being. When a man has reached that state, he has 
attained to the perfection of Karma-Yoga. This is the highest result of good 
works. Although a man has not studied a single system of philosophy, although 
he does not believe in any God, and never has believed, although he has not 
prayed even once in his whole life, if the simple power of good actions has 
brought him to that state where he is ready to give up his life and all else for 
others, he has arrived at the same point to which the religious man will come 
through his prayers and the philosopher through his knowledge; and so you 
may find that the philosopher, the worker, and the devotee, all meet at one 
point, that one point being self-abnegation. However much their systems of 
philosophy and religion may differ, all mankind stand in reverence and awe 
before the man who is ready to sacrifice himself for others. Here, it is not at all 
any question of creed, or doctrine — even men who are very much opposed to 
all religious ideas, when they see one of these acts of complete self-sacrifice, 
feel that they must revere it. Have you not seen even a most bigoted Christian, 
when he reads Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia, stand in reverence of Buddha, 
who Preached no God, preached nothing but self-sacrifice? The only thing is 
that the bigot does not know that his own end and aim in life is exactly the 
same as that of those from whom he differs. The worshipper, by keeping 
constantly before him the idea of God and a surrounding of good, comes to the 
same point at last and says, "Thy will be done," and keeps nothing to himself. 
That is self-abnegation. The philosopher, with his knowledge, sees that the 
seeming self is a delusion and easily gives it up. It is self-abnegation. So 
Karma, Bhakti, and Jnana all meet here; and this is what was meant by all the 
great preachers of ancient times, when they taught that God is not the world. 
There is one thing which is the world and another which is God; and this 
distinction is very true. What they mean by world is selfishness. Unselfishness 
is God. One may live on a throne, in a golden palace, and be perfectly 
unselfish; and then he is in God. Another may live in a hut and wear rags, and 
have nothing in the world; yet, if he is selfish, he is intensely merged in the 
world. 

To come back to one of our main points, we say that we cannot do good 
without at the same time doing some evil, or do evil without doing some good. 



Knowing this, how can we work? There have, therefore, been sects in this 
world who have in an astoundingly preposterous way preached slow suicide as 
the only means to get out of the world, because if a man lives, he has to kill 
poor little animals and plants or do injury to something or some one. So 
according to them the only way out of the world is to die. The Jains have 
preached this doctrine as their highest ideal. This teaching seems to be very 
logical. But the true solution is found in the Gita. It is the theory of non¬ 
attachment, to be attached to nothing while doing our work of life. Know that 
you are separated entirely from the world, though you are in the world, and that 
whatever you may be doing in it, you are not doing that for your own sake. Any 
action that you do for yourself will bring its effect to bear upon you. If it is a 
good action, you will have to take the good effect, and if bad, you will have to 
take the bad effect; but any action that is not done for your own sake, whatever 
it be, will have no effect on you. There is to be found a very expressive 
sentence in our scriptures embodying this idea: "Even if he kill the whole 
universe (or be himself killed), he is neither the killer nor the killed, when he 
knows that he is not acting for himself at all." Therefore Karma-Yoga teaches, 
"Do not give up the world; live in the world, imbibe its influences as much as 
you can; but if it be for your own enjoyment's sake, work not at all." 

Enjoyment should not be the goal. Eirst kill your self and then take the whole 
world as yourself; as the old Christians used to say, "The old man must die." 
This old man is the selfish idea that the whole world is made for our 
enjoyment. Eoolish parents teach their children to pray, "O Lord, Thou hast 
created this sun for me and this moon for me," as if the Lord has had nothing 
else to do than to create everything for these babies. Do not teach your children 
such nonsense. Then again, there are people who are foolish in another way: 
they teach us that all these animals were created for us to kill and eat, and that 
this universe is for the enjoyment of men. That is all foolishness. A tiger may 
say, "Man was created for me" and pray, "O Lord, how wicked are these men 
who do not come and place themselves before me to be eaten; they are 
breaking Your law." If the world is created for us, we are also created for the 
world. That this world is created for our enjoyment is the most wicked idea that 
holds us down. This world is not for our sake. Millions pass out of it every 
year; the world does not feel it; millions of others are supplied in their place. 
Just as much as the world is for us, so we also are for the world. 


To work properly, therefore, you have first to give up the idea of attachment. 
Secondly, do not mix in the fray, hold yourself as a witness and go on working. 
My master used to say, "Look upon your children as a nurse does." The nurse 
will take your baby and fondle it and play with it and behave towards it as 
gently as if it were her own child; but as soon as you give her notice to quit, she 
is ready to start off bag and baggage from the house. Everything in the shape of 
attachment is forgotten; it will not give the ordinary nurse the least pang to 
leave your children and take up other children. Even so are you to be with all 
that you consider your own. You are the nurse, and if you believe in God, 
believe that all these things which you consider yours are really His. The 
greatest weakness often insinuates itself as the greatest good and strength. It is 
a weakness to think that any one is dependent on me, and that I can do good to 
another. This belief is the mother of all our attachment, and through this 
attachment comes all our pain. We must inform our minds that no one in this 
universe depends upon us; not one beggar depends on our charity; not one soul 
on our kindness; not one living thing on our help. All are helped on by nature, 
and will be so helped even though millions of us were not here. The course of 
nature will not stop for such as you and me; it is, as already pointed out, only a 
blessed privilege to you and to me that we are allowed, in the way of helping 
others, to educate ourselves. This is a great lesson to learn in life, and when we 
have learned it fully, we shall never be unhappy; we can go and mix without 
harm in society anywhere and everywhere. You may have wives and husbands, 
and regiments of servants, and kingdoms to govern; if only you act on the 
principle that the world is not for you and does not inevitably need you, they 
can do you no harm. This very year some of your friends may have died. Is the 
world waiting without going on, for them to come again? Is its current stopped? 
No, it goes on. So drive out of your mind the idea that you have to do 
something for the world; the world does not require any help from you. It is 
sheer nonsense on the part of any man to think that he is born to help the world; 
it is simply pride, it is selfishness insinuating itself in the form of virtue. When 
you have trained your mind and your nerves to realise this idea of the world's 
non-dependence on you or on anybody, there will then be no reaction in the 
form of pain resulting from work. When you give something to a man and 
expect nothing — do not even expect the man to be grateful — his ingratitude 
will not tell upon you, because you never expected anything, never thought you 
had any right to anything in the way of a return. You gave him what he 




deserved; his own Karma got it for him; your Karma made you the carrier 
thereof. Why should you be proud of having given away something? You are 
the porter that carried the money or other kind of gift, and the world deserved it 
by its own Karma. Where is then the reason for pride in you? There is nothing 
very great in what you give to the world. When you have acquired the feeling 
of non-attachment, there will then be neither good nor evil for you. It is only 
selfishness that causes the difference between good and evil. It is a very hard 
thing to understand, but you will come to learn in time that nothing in the 
universe has power over you until you allow it to exercise such a power. 
Nothing has power over the Self of man, until the Self becomes a fool and loses 
independence. So, by non-attachment, you overcome and deny the power of 
anything to act upon you. It is very easy to say that nothing has the right to act 
upon you until you allow it to do so; but what is the true sign of the man who 
really does not allow anything to work upon him, who is neither happy nor 
unhappy when acted upon by the external world? The sign is that good or ill 
fortune causes no change in his mind: in all conditions he continues to remain 
the same. 

There was a great sage in India called Vyasa. This Vyasa is known as the 
author of the Vedanta aphorisms, and was a holy man. His father had tried to 
become a very perfect man and had failed. His grandfather had also tried and 
failed. His great-grandfather had similarly tried and failed. He himself did not 
succeed perfectly, but his son, Shuka, was born perfect. Vyasa taught his son 
wisdom; and after teaching him the knowledge of truth himself, he sent him to 
the court of King Janaka. He was a great king and was called Janaka Videha. 
Videha means "without a body". Although a king, he had entirely forgotten that 
he was a body; he felt that he was a spirit all the time. This boy Shuka was sent 
to be taught by him. The king knew that Vyasa's son was coming to him to 
learn wisdom: so he made certain arrangements beforehand. And when the boy 
presented himself at the gates of the palace, the guards took no notice of him 
whatsoever. They only gave him a seat, and he sat there for three days and 
nights, nobody speaking to him, nobody asking him who he was or whence he 
was. He was the son of a very great sage, his father was honoured by the whole 
country, and he himself was a most respectable person; yet the low, vulgar 
guards of the palace would take no notice of him. After that, suddenly, the 
ministers of the king and all the big officials came there and received him with 


the greatest honours. They conducted him in and showed him into splendid 
rooms, gave him the most fragrant baths and wonderful dresses, and for eight 
days they kept him there in all kinds of luxury. That solemnly serene face of 
Shuka did not change even to the smallest extent by the change in the treatment 
accorded to him; he was the same in the midst of this luxury as when waiting at 
the door. Then he was brought before the king. The king was on his throne, 
music was playing, and dancing and other amusements were going on. The 
king then gave him a cup of milk, full to the brim, and asked him to go seven 
times round the hall without spilling even a drop. The boy took the cup and 
proceeded in the midst of the music and the attraction of the beautiful faces. As 
desired by the king, seven times did he go round, and not a drop of the milk 
was spilt. The boy's mind could not be attracted by anything in the world, 
unless he allowed it to affect him. And when he brought the cup to the king, the 
king said to him, "What your father has taught you, and what you have learned 
yourself, I can only repeat. You have known the Truth; go home." 

Thus the man that has practiced control over himself cannot be acted upon by 
anything outside; there is no more slavery for him. His mind has become free. 
Such a man alone is fit to live well in the world. We generally find men 
holding two opinions regarding the world. Some are pessimists and say, “How 
horrible this world is, how wicked!" Some others are optimists and say, "How 
beautiful this world is, how wonderful!" To those who have not controlled their 
own minds, the world is either full of evil or at best a mixture of good and evil. 
This very world will become to us an optimistic world when we become 
masters of our own minds. Nothing will then work upon us as good or evil; we 
shall find everything to be in its proper place, to be harmonious. Some men, 
who begin by saying that the world is a hell, often end by saying that it is a 
heaven when they succeed in the practice of self-control. If we are genuine 
Karma-Yogis and wish to train ourselves to that attainment of this state, 
wherever we may begin we are sure to end in perfect self-abnegation; and as 
soon as this seeming self has gone, the whole world, which at first appears to 
us to be filled with evil, will appear to be heaven itself and full of blessedness. 
Its very atmosphere will be blessed; every human face there will be god. Such 
is the end and aim of Karma-Yoga, and such is its perfection in practical life. 

Our various Yogas do not conflict with each other; each of them leads us to the 


same goal and makes us perfect. Only each has to be strenuously practiced. The 
whole secret is in practicing. First you have to hear, then think, and then 
practice. This is true of every Yoga. You have first to hear about it and 
understand what it is; and many things which you do not understand will be 
made clear to you by constant hearing and thinking. It is hard to understand 
everything at once. The explanation of everything is after all in yourself. No 
one was ever really taught by another; each of us has to teach himself. The 
external teacher offers only the suggestion which rouses the internal teacher to 
work to understand things. Then things will be made clearer to us by our own 
power of perception and thought, and we shall realise them in our own souls; 
and that realisation will grow into the intense power of will. First it is feeling, 
then it becomes willing, and out of that willing comes the tremendous force for 
work that will go through every vein and nerve and muscle, until the whole 
mass of your body is changed into an instrument of the unselfish Yoga of work, 
and the desired result of perfect self-abnegation and utter unselfishness is duly 
attained. This attainment does not depend on any dogma, or doctrine, or belief. 
Whether one is Christian, or Jew, or Gentile, it does not matter. Are you 
unselfish? That is the question. If you are, you will be perfect without reading a 
single religious book, without going into a single church or temple. Each one of 
our Yogas is fitted to make man perfect even without the help of the others, 
because they have all the same goal in view. The Yogas of work, of wisdom, 
and of devotion are all capable of serving as direct and independent means for 
the attainment of Moksha. "Fools alone say that work and philosophy are 
different, not the learned.” The learned know that, though apparently different 
from each other, they at last lead to the same goal of human perfection. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VII 
FREEDOM 

In addition to meaning work, we have stated that psychologically the word 
Karma also implies causation. Any work, any action, any thought that produces 
an effect is called a Karma. Thus the law of Karma means the law of causation, 
of inevitable cause and sequence. Wheresoever there is a cause, there an effect 
must be produced; this necessity cannot be resisted, and this law of Karma, 
according to our philosophy, is true throughout the whole universe. Whatever 
we see, or feel, or do, whatever action there is anywhere in the universe, while 
being the effect of past work on the one hand, becomes, on the other, a cause in 
its turn, and produces its own effect. It is necessary, together with this, to 
consider what is meant by the word "law". By law is meant the tendency of a 
series to repeat itself. When we see one event followed by another, or 
sometimes happening simultaneously with another, we expect this sequence or 
co-existence to recur. Our old logicians and philosophers of the Nyaya school 
call this law by the name of Vyapti. According to them, all our ideas of law are 
due to association. A series of phenomena becomes associated with things in 
our mind in a sort of invariable order, so that whatever we perceive at any time 
is immediately referred to other facts in the mind. Any one idea or, according 
to our psychology, any one wave that is produced in the mind-stuff, Chitta, 
must always give rise to many similar waves. This is the psychological idea of 
association, and causation is only an aspect of this grand pervasive principle of 
association. This pervasiveness of association is what is, in Sanskrit, called 
Vyapti. In the external world the idea of law is the same as in the internal — 
the expectation that a particular phenomenon will be followed by another, and 
that the series will repeat itself. Really speaking, therefore, law does not exist 
in nature. Practically it is an error to say that gravitation exists in the earth, or 
that there is any law existing objectively anywhere in nature. Law is the 
method, the manner in which our mind grasps a series of phenomena; it is all in 
the mind. Certain phenomena, happening one after another or together, and 
followed by the conviction of the regularity of their recurrence — thus enabling 
our minds to grasp the method of the whole series — constitute what we call 









law. 


The next question for consideration is what we mean by law being universal. 
Our universe is that portion of existence which is characterized by what the 
Sanskrit psychologists call Desha-kala-nimitta, or what is known to European 
psychology as space, time, and causation. This universe is only a part of 
infinite existence, thrown into a peculiar mould, composed of space, time, and 
causation. It necessarily follows that law is possible only within this 
conditioned universe; beyond it there cannot be any law. When we speak of the 
universe, we only mean that portion of existence which is limited by our mind 
— the universe of the senses, which we can see, feel, touch, hear, think of, 
imagine. This alone is under law; but beyond it existence cannot be subject to 
law, because causation does not extend beyond the world of our minds. 
Anything beyond the range of our mind and our senses is not bound by the law 
of causation, as there is no mental association of things in the region beyond 
the senses, and no causation without association of ideas. It is only when 
"being" or existence gets moulded into name and form that it obeys the law of 
causation, and is said to be under law; because all law has its essence in 
causation. Therefore we see at once that there cannot be any such thing as free 
will; the very words are a contradiction, because will is what we know, and 
everything that we know is within our universe, and everything within our 
universe is moulded by the conditions of space, time, and causation. Everything 
that we know, or can possibly know, must be subject to causation, and that 
which obeys the law of causation cannot be free. It is acted upon by other 
agents, and becomes a cause in its turn. But that which has become converted 
into the will, which was not the will before, but which, when it fell into this 
mould of space, time, and causation, became converted into the human will, is 
free; and when this will gets out of this mould of space, time, and causation, it 
will be free again. Erom freedom it comes, and becomes moulded into this 
bondage, and it gets out and goes back to freedom again. 

The question has been raised as to from whom this universe comes, in whom it 
rests, and to whom it goes; and the answer has been given that from freedom it 
comes, in bondage it rests, and goes back into that freedom again. So, when we 
speak of man as no other than that infinite being which is manifesting itself, we 
mean that only one very small part thereof is man; this body and this mind 


which we see are only one part of the whole, only one spot of the infinite being. 
This whole universe is only one speck of the infinite being; and all our laws, 
our bondages, our joys and our sorrows, our happinesses and our expectations, 
are only within this small universe; all our progression and digression are 
within its small compass. So you see how childish it is to expect a continuation 
of this universe — the creation of our minds — and to expect to go to heaven, 
which after all must mean only a repetition of this world that we know. You see 
at once that it is an impossible and childish desire to make the whole of infinite 
existence conform to the limited and conditioned existence which we know. 
When a man says that he will have again and again this same thing which he is 
hating now, or, as I sometimes put it, when he asks for a comfortable religion, 
you may know that he has become so degenerate that he cannot think of 
anything higher than what he is now; he is just his little present surroundings 
and nothing more. He has forgotten his infinite nature, and his whole idea is 
confined to these little joys, and sorrows, and heart-jealousies of the moment. 
He thinks that this finite thing is the infinite; and not only so, he will not let this 
foolishness go. He clings on desperately unto Trishna, and the thirst after life, 
what the Buddhists call Tanha and Tissa. There may be millions of kinds of 
happiness, and beings, and laws, and progress, and causation, all acting outside 
the little universe that we know; and, after all, the whole of this comprises but 
one section of our infinite nature. 

To acquire freedom we have to get beyond the limitations of this universe; it 
cannot be found here. Perfect equilibrium, or what the Christians call the peace 
that passeth all understanding, cannot be had in this universe, nor in heaven, 
nor in any place where our mind and thoughts can go, where the senses can 
feel, or which the imagination can conceive. No such place can give us that 
freedom, because all such places would be within our universe, and it is limited 
by space, time, and causation. There may be places that are more ethereal than 
this earth of ours, where enjoyments may be keener, but even those places must 
be in the universe and, therefore, in bondage to law; so we have to go beyond, 
and real religion begins where this little universe ends. These little joys, and 
sorrows, and knowledge of things end there, and the reality begins. Until we 
give up the thirst after life, the strong attachment to this our transient 
conditioned existence we have no hope of catching even a glimpse of that 
infinite freedom beyond. It stands to reason then that there is only one way to 



attain to that freedom which is the goal of all the noblest aspirations of 
mankind, and that is by giving up this little life, giving up this little universe, 
giving up this earth, giving up heaven, giving up the body, giving up the mind, 
giving up everything that is limited and conditioned. If we give up our 
attachment to this little universe of the senses or of the mind, we shall be free 
immediately. The only way to come out of bondage is to go beyond the 
limitations of law, to go beyond causation. 

But it is a most difficult thing to give up the clinging to this universe; few ever 
attain to that. There are two ways to do that mentioned in our books. One is 
called the "Neti, Neti" (not this, not this), the other is called "Iti" (this); the 
former is the negative, and the latter is the positive way. The negative way is 
the most difficult. It is only possible to the men of the very highest, exceptional 
minds and gigantic wills who simply stand up and say, "No, I will not have 
this," and the mind and body obey their will, and they come out successful. But 
such people are very rare. The vast majority of mankind choose the positive 
way, the way through the world, making use of all the bondages themselves to 
break those very bondages. This is also a kind of giving up; only it is done 
slowly and gradually, by knowing things, enjoying things and thus obtaining 
experience, and knowing the nature of things until the mind lets them all go at 
last and becomes unattached. The former way of obtaining non-attachment is 
by reasoning, and the latter way is through work and experience. The first is the 
path of Jnana-Yoga, and is characterized by the refusal to do any work; the 
second is that of Karma-Yoga, in which there is no cessation from work. Every 
one must work in the universe. Only those who are perfectly satisfied with the 
Self, whose desires do not go beyond the Self, whose mind never strays out of 
the Self, to whom the Self is all in all, only those do not work. The rest must 
work. A current rushing down of its own nature falls into a hollow and makes a 
whirlpool, and, after running a little in that whirlpool, it emerges again in the 
form of the free current to go on unchecked Each human life is like that 
current. It gets into the whirl, gets involved in this world of space, time, and 
causation, whirls round a little, crying out, "my father, my brother, my name, 
my fame", and so on, and at last emerges out of it and regains its original 
freedom. The whole universe is doing that. Whether we know it or not, whether 
we are conscious or unconscious of it, we are all working to get out of the 
dream of the world. Man's experience in the world is to enable him to get out of 


its whirlpool. 

What is Karma-Yoga? The knowledge of the secret of work. We see that the 
whole universe is working. For what? For salvation, for liberty; from the atom 
to the highest being, working for the one end, liberty for the mind, for the body, 
for the spirit. All things are always trying to get freedom, flying away from 
bondage. The sun, the moon, the earth, the planets, all are trying to fly away 
from bondage. The centrifugal and the centripetal forces of nature are indeed 
typical of our universe. Instead of being knocked about in this universe, and 
after long delay and thrashing, getting to know things as they are, we learn 
from Karma-Yoga the secret of work, the method of work, the organising 
power of work. A vast mass of energy may be spent in vain if we do not know 
how to utilise it. Karma-Yoga makes a science of work; you learn by it how 
best to utilise all the workings of this world. Work is inevitable, it must be so; 
but we should work to the highest purpose. Karma-Yoga makes us admit that 
this world is a world of five minutes, that it is a something we have to pass 
through; and that freedom is not here, but is only to be found beyond. To find 
the way out of the bondages of the world we have to go through it slowly and 
surely. There may be those exceptional persons about whom I just spoke, those 
who can stand aside and give up the world, as a snake casts off its skin and 
stands aside and looks at it. There are no doubt these exceptional beings; but 
the rest of mankind have to go slowly through the world of work. Karma-Yoga 
shows the process, the secret, and the method of doing it to the best advantage. 

What does it say? "Work incessantly, but give up all attachment to work." Do 
not identify yourself with anything. Hold your mind free. All this that you see, 
the pains and the miseries, are but the necessary conditions of this world; 
poverty and wealth and happiness are but momentary; they do not belong to 
our real nature at all. Our nature is far beyond misery and happiness, beyond 
every object of the senses, beyond the imagination; and yet we must go on 
working all the time. "Misery comes through attachment, not through work." 

As soon as we identify ourselves with the work we do, we feel miserable; but if 
we do not identify ourselves with it, we do not feel that misery. If a beautiful 
picture belonging to another is burnt, a man does not generally become 
miserable; but when his own picture is burnt, how miserable he feels! Why? 
Both were beautiful pictures, perhaps copies of the same original; but in one 


case very much more misery is felt than in the other. It is because in one case 
he identifies himself with the picture, and not in the other. This "I and mine" 
causes the whole misery. With the sense of possession comes selfishness, and 
selfishness brings on misery. Every act of selfishness or thought of selfishness 
makes us attached to something, and immediately we are made slaves. Each 
wave in the Chitta that says "I and mine" immediately puts a chain round us 
and makes us slaves; and the more we say "I and mine", the more slavery 
grows, the more misery increases. Therefore Karma-Yoga tells us to enjoy the 
beauty of all the pictures in the world, but not to identify ourselves with any of 
them. Never say "mine". Whenever we say a thing is "mine", misery will 
immediately come. Do not even say "my child" in your mind. Possess the child, 
but do not say "mine". If you do, then will come the misery. Do not say “my 
house," do not say "my body". The whole difficulty is there. The body is 
neither yours, nor mine, nor anybody's. These bodies are coming and going by 
the laws of nature, but we are free, standing as witness. This body is no more 
free than a picture or a wall. Why should we be attached so much to a body? If 
somebody paints a picture, he does it and passes on. Do not project that tentacle 
of selfishness, "I must possess it". As soon as that is projected, misery will 
begin. 

So Karma-Yoga says, first destroy the tendency to project this tentacle of 
selfishness, and when you have the power of checking it, hold it in and do not 
allow the mind to get into the ways of selfishness. Then you may go out into 
the world and work as much as you can. Mix everywhere, go where you please; 
you will never be contaminated with evil. There is the lotus leaf in the water; 
the water cannot touch and adhere to it; so will you be in the world. This is 
called "Vairagya", dispassion or non-attachment. I believe I have told you that 
without non-attachment there cannot be any kind of Yoga. Non-attachment is 
the basis of all the Yogas. The man who gives up living in houses, wearing fine 
clothes, and eating good food, and goes into the desert, may be a most attached 
person. His only possession, his own body, may become everything to him; and 
as he lives he will be simply struggling for the sake of his body. Non¬ 
attachment does not mean anything that we may do in relation to our external 
body, it is all in the mind. The binding link of "I and mine" is in the mind. If we 
have not this link with the body and with the things of the senses, we are non- 
attached, wherever and whatever we may be. A man may be on a throne and 


perfectly non-attached; another man may be in rags and still very much 
attached. First, we have to attain this state of non-attachment and then to work 
incessantly. Karma-Yoga gives us the method that will help us in giving up all 
attachment, though it is indeed very hard. 

Here are the two ways of giving up all attachment. The one is for those who do 
not believe in God, or in any outside help. They are left to their own devices; 
they have simply to work with their own will, with the powers of their mind 
and discrimination, saying, "I must be non-attached". For those who believe in 
God there is another way, which is much less difficult. They give up the fruits 
of work unto the Lord; they work and are never attached to the results. 
Whatever they see, feel, hear, or do, is for Him. For whatever good work we 
may do, let us not claim any praise or benefit. It is the Lord’s; give up the fruits 
unto Him. Let us stand aside and think that we are only servants obeying the 
Lord, our Master, and that every impulse for action comes from Him every 
moment. Whatever thou worshippest, whatever thou perceivest, whatever thou 
doest, give up all unto Him and be at rest. Let us be at peace, perfect peace, 
with ourselves, and give up our whole body and mind and everything as an 
eternal sacrifice unto the Lord. Instead of the sacrifice of pouring oblations into 
the fire, perform this one great sacrifice day and night — the sacrifice of your 
little self. "In search of wealth in this world. Thou art the only wealth I have 
found; I sacrifice myself unto Thee. In search of some one to be loved. Thou 
art the only one beloved I have found; I sacrifice myself unto Thee." Let us 
repeat this day and night, and say, "Nothing for me; no matter whether the 
thing is good, bad, or indifferent; I do not care for it; I sacrifice all unto Thee." 
Day and night let us renounce our seeming self until it becomes a habit with us 
to do so, until it gets into the blood, the nerves, and the brain, and the whole 
body is every moment obedient to this idea of self-renunciation. Go then into 
the midst of the battlefield, with the roaring cannon and the din of war, and you 
will find yourself to be free and at peace. 

Karma-Yoga teaches us that the ordinary idea of duty is on the lower plane; 
nevertheless, all of us have to do our duty. Yet we may see that this peculiar 
sense of duty is very often a great cause of misery. Duty becomes a disease 
with us; it drags us ever forward. It catches hold of us and makes our whole life 
miserable. It is the bane of human life. This duty, this idea of duty is the 



midday summer sun which scorches the innermost soul of mankind. Look at 
those poor slaves to duty! Duty leaves them no time to say prayers, no time to 
bathe. Duty is ever on them. They go out and work. Duty is on them! They 
come home and think of the work for the next day. Duty is on them! It is living 
a slave's life, at last dropping down in the street and dying in harness, like a 
horse. This is duty as it is understood. The only true duty is to be unattached 
and to work as free beings, to give up all work unto God. All our duties are His. 
Blessed are we that we are ordered out here. We serve our time; whether we do 
it ill or well, who knows? If we do it well, we do not get the fruits. If we do it 
ill, neither do we get the care. Be at rest, be free, and work. This kind of 
freedom is a very hard thing to attain. How easy it is to interpret slavery as duty 
— the morbid attachment of flesh for flesh as duty! Men go out into the world 
and struggle and fight for money or for any other thing to which they get 
attached. Ask them why they do it. They say, "It is a duty”. It is the absurd 
greed for gold and gain, and they try to cover it with a few flowers. 

What is duty after all? It is really the impulsion of the flesh, of our attachment; 
and when an attachment has become established, we call it duty. For instance, 
in countries where there is no marriage, there is no duty between husband and 
wife; when marriage comes, husband and wife live together on account of 
attachment; and that kind of living together becomes settled after generations; 
and when it becomes so settled, it becomes a duty. It is, so to say, a sort of 
chronic disease. When it is acute, we call it disease; when it is chronic, we call 
it nature. It is a disease. So when attachment becomes chronic, we baptise it 
with the high sounding name of duty. We strew flowers upon it, trumpets 
sound for it, sacred texts are said over it, and then the whole world fights, and 
men earnestly rob each other for this duty's sake. Duty is good to the extent that 
it checks brutality. To the lowest kinds of men, who cannot have any other 
ideal, it is of some good; but those who want to be Karma-Yogis must throw 
this idea of duty overboard. There is no duty for you and me. Whatever you 
have to give to the world, do give by all means, but not as a duty. Do not take 
any thought of that. Be not compelled. Why should you be compelled? 
Everything that you do under compulsion goes to build up attachment. Why 
should you have any duty? Resign everything unto God. In this tremendous 
fiery furnace where the fire of duty scorches everybody, drink this cup of 
nectar and be happy. We are all simply working out His will, and have nothing 



to do with rewards and punishments. If you want the reward, you must also 
have the punishment; the only way to get out of the punishment is to give up 
the reward. The only way of getting out of misery is by giving up the idea of 
happiness, because these two are linked to each other. On one side there is 
happiness, on the other there is misery. On one side there is life, on the other 
there is death. The only way to get beyond death is to give up the love of life. 
Life and death are the same thing, looked at from different points. So the idea 
of happiness without misery, or of life without death, is very good for school¬ 
boys and children; but the thinker sees that it is all a contradiction in terms and 
gives up both. Seek no praise, no reward, for anything you do. No sooner do 
we perform a good action than we begin to desire credit for it. No sooner do we 
give money to some charity than we want to see our names blazoned in the 
papers. Misery must come as the result of such desires. The greatest men in the 
world have passed away unknown. The Buddhas and the Christs that we know 
are but second-rate heroes in comparison with the greatest men of whom the 
world knows nothing. Hundreds of these unknown heroes have lived in every 
country working silently. Silently they live and silently they pass away; and in 
time their thoughts find expression in Buddhas or Christs, and it is these latter 
that become known to us. The highest men do not seek to get any name or fame 
from their knowledge. They leave their ideas to the world; they put forth no 
claims for themselves and establish no schools or systems in their name. Their 
whole nature shrinks from such a thing. They are the pure Sattvikas, who can 
never make any stir, but only melt down in love. I have seen one such Yogi 
who lives in a cave in India. He is one of the most wonderful men I have ever 
seen. He has so completely lost the sense of his own individuality that we may 
say that the man in him is completely gone, leaving behind only the all 
comprehending sense of the divine. If an animal bites one of his arms, he is 
ready to give it his other arm also, and say that it is the Lord's will. Everything 
that comes to him is from the Lord. He does not show himself to men, and yet 
he is a magazine of love and of true and sweet ideas. 

Next in order come the men with more Rajas, or activity, combative natures, 
who take up the ideas of the perfect ones and preach them to the world. The 
highest kind of men silently collect true and noble ideas, and others — the 
Buddhas and Christs — go from place to place preaching them and working for 
them. In the life of Gautama Buddha we notice him constantly saying that he is 


the twenty-fifth Buddha. The twenty-four before him are unknown to history, 
although the Buddha known to history must have built upon foundations laid 
by them. The highest men are calm, silent, and unknown. They are the men 
who really know the power of thought; they are sure that, even if they go into a 
cave and close the door and simply think five true thoughts and then pass away, 
these five thoughts of theirs will live through eternity. Indeed such thoughts 
will penetrate through the mountains, cross the oceans, and travel through the 
world. They will enter deep into human hearts and brains and raise up men and 
women who will give them practical expression in the workings of human life. 
These Sattvika men are too near the Lord to be active and to fight, to be 
working, struggling, preaching and doing good, as they say, here on earth to 
humanity. The active workers, however good, have still a little remnant of 
ignorance left in them. When our nature has yet some impurities left in it, then 
alone can we work. It is in the nature of work to be impelled ordinarily by 
motive and by attachment. In the presence of an ever active Providence who 
notes even the sparrow's fall, how can man attach any importance to his own 
work? Will it not be a blasphemy to do so when we know that He is taking care 
of the minutest things in the world? We have only to stand in awe and 
reverence before Him saying, "Thy will be done". The highest men cannot 
work, for in them there is no attachment. Those whose whole soul is gone into 
the Self, those whose desires are confined in the Self, who have become ever 
associated with the Self, for them there is no work. Such are indeed the highest 
of mankind; but apart from them every one else has to work. In so working we 
should never think that we can help on even the least thing in this universe. We 
cannot. We only help ourselves in this gymnasium of the world. This is the 
proper attitude of work. If we work in this way, if we always remember that 
our present opportunity to work thus is a privilege which has been given to us, 
we shall never be attached to anything. Millions like you and me think that we 
are great people in the world; but we all die, and in five minutes the world 
forgets us. But the life of God is infinite. "Who can live a moment, breathe a 
moment, if this all-powerful One does not will it?" He is the ever active 
Providence. All power is His and within His command. Through His command 
the winds blow, the sun shines, the earth lives, and death stalks upon the earth. 
He is the all in all; He is all and in all. We can only worship Him. Give up all 
fruits of work; do good for its own sake; then alone will come perfect non¬ 
attachment. The bonds of the heart will thus break, and we shall reap perfect 


freedom. This freedom is indeed the goal of Karma-Yoga. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Karma-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VIII 

THE IDEAL OF KARMA-YOGA 

The grandest idea in the religion of the Vedanta is that we may reach the same 
goal by different paths; and these paths I have generalised into four, viz those 
of work, love, psychology, and knowledge. But you must, at the same time, 
remember that these divisions are not very marked and quite exclusive of each 
other. Each blends into the other. But according to the type which prevails, we 
name the divisions. It is not that you can find men who have no other faculty 
than that of work, nor that you can find men who are no more than devoted 
worshippers only, nor that there are men who have no more than mere 
knowledge. These divisions are made in accordance with the type or the 
tendency that may be seen to prevail in a man. We have found that, in the end, 
all these four paths converge and become one. All religions and all methods of 
work and worship lead us to one and the same goal. 

I have already tried to point out that goal. It is freedom as I understand it. 
Everything that we perceive around us is struggling towards freedom, from the 
atom to the man, from the insentient, lifeless particle of matter to the highest 
existence on earth, the human soul. The whole universe is in fact the result of 
this struggle for freedom. In all combinations every particle is trying to go on 
its own way, to fly from the other particles; but the others are holding it in 
check. Our earth is trying to fly away from the sun, and the moon from the 
earth. Everything has a tendency to infinite dispersion. All that we see in the 
universe has for its basis this one struggle towards freedom; it is under the 
impulse of this tendency that the saint prays and the robber robs. When the line 
of action taken is not a proper one, we call it evil; and when the manifestation 
of it is proper and high, we call it good. But the impulse is the same, the 
struggle towards freedom. The saint is oppressed with the knowledge of his 
condition of bondage, and he wants to get rid of it; so he worships God. The 
thief is oppressed with the idea that he does not possess certain things, and he 
tries to get rid of that want, to obtain freedom from it; so he steals. Ereedom is 
the one goal of all nature, sentient or insentient; and consciously or 






unconsciously, everything is struggling towards that goal. The freedom which 
the saint seeks is very different from that which the robber seeks; the freedom 
loved by the saint leads him to the enjoyment of infinite, unspeakable bliss, 
while that on which the robber has set his heart only forges other bonds for his 
soul. 

There is to be found in every religion the manifestation of this struggle towards 
freedom. It is the groundwork of all morality, of unselfishness, which means 
getting rid of the idea that men are the same as their little body. When we see a 
man doing good work, helping others, it means that he cannot be confined 
within the limited circle of "me and mine". There is no limit to this getting out 
of selfishness. All the great systems of ethics preach absolute unselfishness as 
the goal. Supposing this absolute unselfishness can be reached by a man, what 
becomes of him? He is no more the little Mr. So-and-so; he has acquired 
infinite expansion. The little personality which he had before is now lost to him 
for ever; he has become infinite, and the attainment of this infinite expansion is 
indeed the goal of all religions and of all moral and philosophical teachings. 

The personalist, when he hears this idea philosophically put, gets frightened. At 
the same time, if he preaches morality, he after all teaches the very same idea 
himself. He puts no limit to the unselfishness of man. Suppose a man becomes 
perfectly unselfish under the personalistic system, how are we to distinguish 
him from the perfected ones in other system? He has become one with the 
universe and to become that is the goal of all; only the poor personalist has not 
the courage to follow out his own reasoning to its right conclusion. Karma- 
Yoga is the attaining through unselfish work of that freedom which is the goal 
of all human nature. Every selfish action, therefore, retards our reaching the 
goal, and every unselfish action takes us towards the goal; that is why the only 
definition that can be given of morality is this: That which is selfish is immoral, 
and that which is unselfish is moral. 

But, if you come to details, the matter will not be seen to be quite so simple. 

For instance, environment often makes the details different as I have already 
mentioned. The same action under one set of circumstances may be unselfish, 
and under another set quite selfish. So we can give only a general definition, 
and leave the details to be worked out by taking into consideration the 
differences in time, place, and circumstances. In one country one kind of 


conduct is considered moral, and in another the very same is immoral, because 
the circumstances differ. The goal of all nature is freedom, and freedom is to be 
attained only by perfect unselfishness; every thought, word, or deed that is 
unselfish takes us towards the goal, and, as such, is called moral. That 
definition, you will find, holds good in every religion and every system of 
ethics. In some systems of thought morality is derived from a Superior Being 
— God. If you ask why a man ought to do this and not that, their answer is: 
"Because such is the command of God." But whatever be the source from 
which it is derived, their code of ethics also has the same central idea — not to 
think of self but to give up self. And yet some persons, in spite of this high 
ethical idea, are frightened at the thought of having to give up their little 
personalities. We may ask the man who clings to the idea of little personalities 
to consider the case of a person who has become perfectly unselfish, who has 
no thought for himself, who does no deed for himself, who speaks no word for 
himself, and then say where his "himself" is. That "himself" is known to him 
only so long as he thinks, acts, or speaks for himself. If he is only conscious of 
others, of the universe, and of the all, where is his "himself"? It is gone for 
ever. 

Karma-Yoga, therefore, is a system of ethics and religion intended to attain 
freedom through unselfishness, and by good works. The Karma-Yogi need not 
believe in any doctrine whatever. He may not believe even in God, may not ask 
what his soul is, nor think of any metaphysical speculation. He has got his own 
special aim of realising selflessness; and he has to work it out himself. Every 
moment of his life must be realisation, because he has to solve by mere work, 
without the help of doctrine or theory, the very same problem to which the 
Jnani applies his reason and inspiration and the Bhakta his love. 

Now comes the next question: What is this work? What is this doing good to 
the world? Can we do good to the world? In an absolute sense, no; in a relative 
sense, yes. No permanent or everlasting good can be done to the world; if it 
could be done, the world would not be this world. We may satisfy the hunger 
of a man for five minutes, but he will be hungry again. Every pleasure with 
which we supply a man may be seen to be momentary. No one can 
permanently cure this ever-recurring fever of pleasure and pain. Can any 
permanent happiness be given to the world? In the ocean we cannot raise a 



wave without causing a hollow somewhere else. The sum total of the good 
things in the world has been the same throughout in its relation to man's need 
and greed. It cannot be increased or decreased. Take the history of the human 
race as we know it today. Do we not find the same miseries and the same 
happiness, the same pleasures and pains, the same differences in position? Are 
not some rich, some poor, some high, some low, some healthy, some 
unhealthy? All this was just the same with the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the 
Romans in ancient times as it is with the Americans today. So far as history is 
known, it has always been the same; yet at the same time we find that, running 
along with all these incurable differences of pleasure and pain, there has ever 
been the struggle to alleviate them. Every period of history has given birth to 
thousands of men and women who have worked hard to smooth the passage of 
life for others. And how far have they succeeded? We can only play at driving 
the ball from one place to another. We take away pain from the physical plane, 
and it goes to the mental one. It is like that picture in Dante's hell where the 
misers were given a mass of gold to roll up a hill. Every time they rolled it up a 
little, it again rolled down. All our talks about the millennium are very nice as 
school-boys' stories, but they are no better than that. All nations that dream of 
the millennium also think that, of all peoples in the world, they will have the 
best of it then for themselves. This is the wonderfully unselfish idea of the 
millennium! 

We cannot add happiness to this world; similarly, we cannot add pain to it 
either. The sum total of the energies of pleasure and pain displayed here on 
earth will be the same throughout. We just push it from this side to the other 
side, and from that side to this, but it will remain the same, because to remain 
so is its very nature. This ebb and flow, this rising and falling, is in the world's 
very nature; it would be as logical to hold otherwise as to say that we may have 
life without death. This is complete nonsense, because the very idea of life 
implies death and the very idea of pleasure implies pain. The lamp is constantly 
burning out, and that is its life. If you want to have life, you have to die every 
moment for it. Life and death are only different expressions of the same thing 
looked at from different standpoints; they are the falling and the rising of the 
same wave, and the two form one whole. One looks at the "fall" side and 
becomes a pessimist another looks at the "rise" side and becomes an optimist. 
When a boy is going to school and his father and mother are taking care of him. 


everything seems blessed to him; his wants are simple, he is a great optimist. 
But the old man, with his varied experience, becomes calmer and is sure to 
have his warmth considerably cooled down. So, old nations, with signs of 
decay all around them, are apt to be less hopeful than new nations. There is a 
proverb in India: "A thousand years a city, and a thousand years a forest." This 
change of city into forest and vice versa is going on everywhere, and it makes 
people optimists or pessimists according to the side they see of it. 

The next idea we take up is the idea of equality. These millennium ideas have 
been great motive powers to work. Many religions preach this as an element in 
them — that God is coming to rule the universe, and that then there will be no 
difference at all in conditions. The people who preach this doctrine are mere 
fanatics, and fanatics are indeed the sincerest of mankind. Christianity was 
preached just on the basis of the fascination of this fanaticism, and that is what 
made it so attractive to the Greek and the Roman slaves. They believed that 
under the millennial religion there would be no more slavery, that there would 
be plenty to eat and drink; and, therefore, they flocked round the Christian 
standard. Those who preached the idea first were of course ignorant fanatics, 
but very sincere. In modern times this millennial aspiration takes the form of 
equality — of liberty, equality, and fraternity. This is also fanaticism. True 
equality has never been and never can be on earth. How can we all be equal 
here? This impossible kind of equality implies total death. What makes this 
world what it is? Lost balance. In the primal state, which is called chaos, there 
is perfect balance. How do all the formative forces of the universe come then? 
By struggling, competition, conflict. Suppose that all the particles of matter 
were held in equilibrium, would there be then any process of creation? We 
know from science that it is impossible. Disturb a sheet of water, and there you 
find every particle of the water trying to become calm again, one rushing 
against the other; and in the same way all the phenomena which we call the 
universe — all things therein — are struggling to get back to the state of 
perfect balance. Again a disturbance comes, and again we have combination 
and creation. Inequality is the very basis of creation. At the same time the 
forces struggling to obtain equality are as much a necessity of creation as those 
which destroy it. 

Absolute equality, that which means a perfect balance of all the struggling 




forces in all the planes, can never be in this world. Before you attain that state, 
the world will have become quite unfit for any kind of life, and no one will be 
there. We find, therefore, that all these ideas of the millennium and of absolute 
equality are not only impossible but also that, if we try to carry them out, they 
will lead us surely enough to the day of destruction. What makes the difference 
between man and man? It is largely the difference in the brain. Nowadays no 
one but a lunatic will say that we are all born with the same brain power. We 
come into the world with unequal endowments; we come as greater men or as 
lesser men, and there is no getting away from that pre-natally determined 
condition. The American Indians were in this country for thousands of years, 
and a few handfuls of your ancestors came to their land. What difference they 
have caused in the appearance of the country! Why did not the Indians make 
improvements and build cities, if all were equal? With your ancestors a 
different sort of brain power came into the land, different bundles of past 
impressions came, and they worked out and manifested themselves. Absolute 
non-differentiation is death. So long as this world lasts, differentiation there 
will and must be, and the millennium of perfect equality will come only when a 
cycle of creation comes to its end. Before that, equality cannot be. Yet this idea 
of realising the millennium is a great motive power. Just as inequality is 
necessary for creation itself, so the struggle to limit it is also necessary. If there 
were no struggle to become free and get back to God, there would be no 
creation either. It is the difference between these two forces that determines the 
nature of the motives of men. There will always be these motives to work, 
some tending towards bondage and others towards freedom. 

This world's wheel within wheel is a terrible mechanism; if we put our hands in 
it, as soon as we are caught we are gone. We all think that when we have done 
a certain duty, we shall be at rest; but before we have done a part of that duty, 
another is already in waiting. We are all being dragged along by this mighty, 
complex world-machine. There are only two ways out of it; one is to give up all 
concerns with the machine, to let it go and stand aside, to give up our desires. 
That is very easy to say, but is almost impossible to do. I do not know whether 
in twenty millions of men one can do that. The other way is to plunge into the 
world and learn the secret of work, and that is the way of Karma-Yoga. Do not 
fly away from the wheels of the world-machine, but stand inside it and learn 
the secret of work. Through proper work done inside, it is also possible to come 


out. Through this machinery itself is the way out. 

We have now seen what work is. It is a part of natures foundation, and goes on 
always. Those that believe in God understand this better, because they know 
that God is not such an incapable being as will need our help. Although this 
universe will go on always, our goal is freedom, our goal is unselfishness; and 
according to Karma-Yoga, that goal is to be reached through work. All ideas of 
making the world perfectly happy may be good as motive powers for fanatics; 
but we must know that fanaticism brings forth as much evil as good. The 
Karma-Yogi asks why you require any motive to work other than the inborn 
love of freedom. Be beyond the common worldly motives. "To work you have 
the right, but not to the fruits thereof." Man can train himself to know and to 
practice that, says the Karma-Yogi. When the idea of doing good becomes a 
part of his very being, then he will not seek for any motive outside. Let us do 
good because it is good to do good; he who does good work even in order to 
get to heaven binds himself down, says the Karma-Yogi. Any work that is done 
with any the least selfish motive, instead of making us free, forges one more 
chain for our feet. 

So the only way is to give up all the fruits of work, to be unattached to them. 
Know that this world is not we, nor are we this world; that we are really not the 
body; that we really do not work. We are the Self, eternally at rest and at peace. 
Why should we be bound by anything? It is very good to say that we should be 
perfectly non-attached, but what is the way to do it? Every good work we do 
without any ulterior motive, instead of forging a new chain, will break one of 
the links in the existing chains. Every good thought that we send to the world 
without thinking of any return, will be stored up there and break one link in the 
chain, and make us purer and purer, until we become the purest of mortals. Yet 
all this may seem to be rather quixotic and too philosophical, more theoretical 
than practical. I have read many arguments against the Bhagavad-Gita, and 
many have said that without motives you cannot work. They have never seen 
unselfish work except under the influence of fanaticism, and, therefore, they 
speak in that way. 

Let me tell you in conclusion a few words about one man who actually carried 
this teaching of Karma-Yoga into practice. That man is Buddha. He is the one 


man who ever carried this into perfect practice. All the prophets of the world, 
except Buddha, had external motives to move them to unselfish action. The 
prophets of the world, with this single exception, may be divided into two sets, 
one set holding that they are incarnations of God come down on earth, and the 
other holding that they are only messengers from God; and both draw their 
impetus for work from outside, expect reward from outside, however highly 
spiritual may be the language they use. But Buddha is the only prophet who 
said, "I do not care to know your various theories about God. What is the use of 
discussing all the subtle doctrines about the soul? Do good and be good. And 
this will take you to freedom and to whatever truth there is." He was, in the 
conduct of his life, absolutely without personal motives; and what man worked 
more than he? Show me in history one character who has soared so high above 
all. The whole human race has produced but one such character, such high 
philosophy, such wide sympathy. This great philosopher, preaching the highest 
philosophy, yet had the deepest sympathy for the lowest of animals, and never 
put forth any claims for himself. He is the ideal Karma-Yogi, acting entirely 
without motive, and the history of humanity shows him to have been the 
greatest man ever born; beyond compare the greatest combination of heart and 
brain that ever existed, the greatest soul-power that has even been manifested. 
He is the first great reformer the world has seen. He was the first who dared to 
say, "Believe not because some old manuscripts are produced, believe not 
because it is your national belief, because you have been made to believe it 
from your childhood; but reason it all out, and after you have analysed it, then, 
if you find that it will do good to one and all, believe it, live up to it, and help 
others to live up to it." He works best who works without any motive, neither 
for money, nor for fame, nor for anything else; and when a man can do that, he 
will be a Buddha, and out of him will come the power to work in such a 
manner as will transform the world. This man represents the very highest ideal 
of Karma-Yoga. 


» 


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 1 

Raja-Yoga 

Preface 
Introductory 
The First Steps 

Prana 

The Psychic Prana 

The Control of Psychic Prana 

Pratyahara and Dharana 

Dhyana and Samadhi 

Raj a-Yoga in brief 

Patanjall's Yoga Aphorisms 

Introduction 

Concentration: Its spiritual uses 

Concentration: Its practice 

Powers 

Independence 


















Appendix 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


RAJA-YOGA 

PREFACE 

Since the dawn of history, various extraordinary phenomena have been 
recorded as happening amongst human beings. Witnesses are not wanting in 
modern times to attest to the fact of such events, even in societies living under 
the full blaze of modern science. The vast mass of such evidence is unreliable, 
as coming from ignorant, superstitious, or fraudulent persons. In many 
instances the so-called miracles are imitations. But what do they imitate? It is 
not the sign of a candid and scientific mind to throw overboard anything 
without proper investigation. Surface scientists, unable to explain the various 
extraordinary mental phenomena, strive to ignore their very existence. They 
are, therefore, more culpable than those who think that their prayers are 
answered by a being, or beings, above the clouds, or than those who believe 
that their petitions will make such beings change the course of the universe. 

The latter have the excuse of ignorance, or at least of a defective system of 
education, which has taught them dependence upon such beings, a dependence 
which has become a part of their degenerate nature. The former have no such 
excuse. 

For thousands of years such phenomena have been studied, investigated, and 
generalised, the whole ground of the religious faculties of man has been 
analysed, and the practical result is the science of Raja-Yoga. Raja-Yoga does 
not, after the unpardonable manner of some modern scientists, deny the 
existence of facts which are difficult to explain; on the other hand, it gently yet 
in no uncertain terms tells the superstitious that miracles, and answers to 
prayers, and powers of faith, though true as facts, are not rendered 
comprehensible through the superstitious explanation of attributing them to the 
agency of a being, or beings, above the clouds. It declares that each man is only 
a conduit for the infinite ocean of knowledge and power that lies behind 
mankind. It teaches that desires and wants are in man, that the power of supply 
is also in man; and that wherever and whenever a desire, a want, a prayer has 
been fulfilled, it was out of this infinite magazine that the supply came, and not 






from any supernatural being. The idea of supernatural beings may rouse to a 
certain extent the power of action in man, but it also brings spiritual decay. It 
brings dependence; it brings fear; it brings superstition. It degenerates into a 
horrible belief in the natural weakness of man. There is no supernatural, says 
the Yogi, but there are in nature gross manifestations and subtle manifestations. 
The subtle are the causes, the gross the effects. The gross can be easily 
perceived by the senses; not so the subtle. The practice of Raj a-Yoga will lead 
to the acquisition of the more subtle perceptions. 

All the orthodox systems of Indian philosophy have one goal in view, the 
liberation of the soul through perfection. The method is by Yoga. The word 
Yoga covers an immense ground, but both the Sankhya and the Vedanta 
Schools point to Yoga in some form or other. 

The subject of the present book is that form of Yoga known as Raj a-Yoga. The 
aphorisms of Patanjali are the highest authority on Raja-Yoga, and form its 
textbook. The other philosophers, though occasionally differing from Patanjali 
in some philosophical points, have, as a rule, acceded to his method of practice 
a decided consent. The first part of this book comprises several lectures to 
classes delivered by the present writer in New York. The second part is a rather 
free translation of the aphorisms (Sutras) of Patanjali, with a running 
commentary. Effort has been made to avoid technicalities as far as possible, 
and to keep to the free and easy style of conversation. In the first part some 
simple and specific directions are given for the student who wants to practice, 
but all such are especially and earnestly reminded that, with few exceptions, 
Yoga can only be safely learnt by direct contact with a teacher. If these 
conversations succeed in awakening a desire for further information on the 
subject, the teacher will not be wanting. 

The system of Patanjali is based upon the system of the Sankhyas, the points of 
difference being very few. The two most important differences are, first, that 
Patanjali admits a Personal God in the form of a first teacher, while the only 
God the Sankhyas admit is a nearly perfected being, temporarily in charge of a 
cycle of creation. Second, the Yogis hold the mind to be equally all-pervading 
with the soul, or Purusha, and the Sankhyas do not. 


The Author 


Each soul is potentially divine. 

The goal is to manifest this Divinity within by controlling nature, external and 
internal. 

Do this either by work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy — by 
one, or more, or all of these — and be free. 

This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or rituals, or books, or 
temples, or forms, are but secondary details. 

» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 

All our knowledge is based upon experience. What we call inferential 
knowledge, in which we go from the less to the more general, or from the 
general to the particular, has experience as its basis. In what are called the exact 
sciences, people easily find the truth, because it appeals to the particular 
experiences of every human being. The scientist does not tell you to believe in 
anything, but he has certain results which come from his own experiences, and 
reasoning on them when he asks us to believe in his conclusions, he appeals to 
some universal experience of humanity. In every exact science there is a basis 
which is common to all humanity, so that we can at once see the truth or the 
fallacy of the conclusions drawn therefrom. Now, the question is: Has religion 
any such basis or not? I shall have to answer the question both in the 
affirmative and in the negative. 

Religion, as it is generally taught all over the world, is said to be based upon 
faith and belief, and, in most cases, consists only of different sets of theories, 
and that is the reason why we find all religions quarrelling with one another. 
These theories, again, are based upon belief. One man says there is a great 
Being sitting above the clouds and governing the whole universe, and he asks 
me to believe that solely on the authority of his assertion. In the same way, I 
may have my own ideas, which I am asking others to believe, and if they ask a 
reason, I cannot give them any. This is why religion and metaphysical 
philosophy have a bad name nowadays. Every educated man seems to say, "Oh, 
these religions are only bundles of theories without any standard to judge them 
by, each man preaching his own pet ideas." Nevertheless, there is a basis of 
universal belief in religion, governing all the different theories and all the 
varying ideas of different sects in different countries. Going to their basis we 
find that they also are based upon universal experiences. 

In the first place, if you analyse all the various religions of the world, you will 
find that these are divided into two classes, those with a book and those without 






a book. Those with a book are the strongest, and have the largest number of 
followers. Those without books have mostly died out, and the few new ones 
have very small following. Yet, in all of them we find one consensus of 
opinion, that the truths they teach are the results of the experiences of particular 
persons. The Christian asks you to believe in his religion, to believe in Christ 
and to believe in him as the incarnation of God, to believe in a God, in a soul, 
and in a better state of that soul. If I ask him for reason, he says he believes in 
them. But if you go to the fountain-head of Christianity, you will find that it is 
based upon experience. Christ said he saw God; the disciples said they felt God; 
and so forth. Similarly, in Buddhism, it is Buddha's experience. He experienced 
certain truths, saw them, came in contact with them, and preached them to the 
world. So with the Hindus. In their books the writers, who are called Rishis, or 
sages, declare they experienced certain truths, and these they preach. Thus it is 
clear that all the religions of the world have been built upon that one universal 
and adamantine foundation of all our knowledge — direct experience. The 
teachers all saw God; they all saw their own souls, they saw their future, they 
saw their eternity, and what they saw they preached. Only there is this 
difference that by most of these religions especially in modern times, a peculiar 
claim is made, namely, that these experiences are impossible at the present day; 
they were only possible with a few men, who were the first founders of the 
religions that subsequently bore their names. At the present time these 
experiences have become obsolete, and, therefore, we have now to take religion 
on belief. This I entirely deny. If there has been one experience in this world in 
any particular branch of knowledge, it absolutely follows that that experience 
has been possible millions of times before, and will be repeated eternally. 
Uniformity is the rigorous law of nature; what once happened can happen 
always. 

The teachers of the science of Yoga, therefore, declare that religion is not only 
based upon the experience of ancient times, but that no man can be religious 
until he has the same perceptions himself. Yoga is the science which teaches us 
how to get these perceptions. It is not much use to talk about religion until one 
has felt it. Why is there so much disturbance, so much fighting and quarrelling 
in the name of God? There has been more bloodshed in the name of God than 
for any other cause, because people never went to the fountain-head; they were 
content only to give a mental assent to the customs of their forefathers, and 



wanted others to do the same. What right has a man to say he has a soul if he 
does not feel it, or that there is a God if he does not see Him? If there is a God 
we must see Him, if there is a soul we must perceive it; otherwise it is better not 
to believe. It is better to be an outspoken atheist than a hypocrite. The modern 
idea, on the one hand, with the "learned" is that religion and metaphysics and 
all search after a Supreme Being are futile; on the other hand, with the semi- 
educated, the idea seems to be that these things really have no basis; their only 
value consists in the fact that they furnish strong motive powers for doing good 
to the world. If men believe in a God, they may become good, and moral, and 
so make good citizens. We cannot blame them for holding such ideas, seeing 
that all the teaching these men get is simply to believe in an eternal rigmarole of 
words, without any substance behind them. They are asked to live upon words; 
can they do it? If they could, I should not have the least regard for human 
nature. Man wants truth, wants to experience truth for himself; when he has 
grasped it, realised it, felt it within his heart of hearts, then alone, declare the 
Vedas, would all doubts vanish, all darkness be scattered, and all crookedness 
be made straight. "Ye children of immortality, even those who live in the 
highest sphere, the way is found; there is a way out of all this darkness, and that 
is by perceiving Him who is beyond all darkness; there is no other way." 

The science of Raj a-Yoga proposes to put before humanity a practical and 
scientifically worked out method of reaching this truth. In the first place, every 
science must have its own method of investigation. If you want to become an 
astronomer and sit down and cry "Astronomy! Astronomy!" it will never come 
to you. The same with chemistry. A certain method must be followed. You 
must go to a laboratory, take different substances, mix them up, compound 
them, experiment with them, and out of that will come a knowledge of 
chemistry. If you want to be an astronomer, you must go to an observatory, take 
a telescope, study the stars and planets, and then you will become an 
astronomer. Each science must have its own methods. I could preach you 
thousands of sermons, but they would not make you religious, until you 
practiced the method. These are the truths of the sages of all countries, of all 
ages, of men pure and unselfish, who had no motive but to do good to the 
world. They all declare that they have found some truth higher than what the 
senses can bring to us, and they invite verification. They ask us to take up the 
method and practice honestly, and then, if we do not find this higher truth, we 


will have the right to say there is no truth in the claim, but before we have done 
that, we are not rational in denying the truth of their assertions. So we must 
work faithfully using the prescribed methods, and light will come. 

In acquiring knowledge we make use of generalizations, and generalization is 
based upon observation. We first observe facts, then generalize, and then draw 
conclusions or principles. The knowledge of the mind, of the internal nature of 
man, of thought, can never be had until we have first the power of observing the 
facts that are going on within. It is comparatively easy to observe facts in the 
external world, for many instruments have been invented for the purpose, but in 
the internal world we have no instrument to help us. Yet we know we must 
observe in order to have a real science. Without a proper analysis, any science 
will be hopeless — mere theorising. And that is why all the psychologists have 
been quarrelling among themselves since the beginning of time, except those 
few who found out the means of observation. 

The science of Raj a-Yoga, in the first place, proposes to give us such a means 
of observing the internal states. The instrument is the mind itself. The power of 
attention, when properly guided, and directed towards the internal world, will 
analyse the mind, and illumine facts for us. The powers of the mind are like 
rays of light dissipated; when they are concentrated, they illumine. This is our 
only means of knowledge. Everyone is using it, both in the external and the 
internal world; but, for the psychologist, the same minute observation has to be 
directed to the internal world, which the scientific man directs to the external; 
and this requires a great deal of practice. From our childhood upwards we have 
been taught only to pay attention to things external, but never to things internal; 
hence most of us have nearly lost the faculty of observing the internal 
mechanism. To turn the mind as it were, inside, stop it from going outside, and 
then to concentrate all its powers, and throw them upon the mind itself, in order 
that it may know its own nature, analyse itself, is very hard work. Yet that is the 
only way to anything which will be a scientific approach to the subject. 

What is the use of such knowledge? In the first place, knowledge itself is the 
highest reward of knowledge, and secondly, there is also utility in it. It will take 
away all our misery. When by analysing his own mind, man comes face to face, 
as it were, with something which is never destroyed, something which is, by its 


own nature, eternally pure and perfect, he will no more be miserable, no more 
unhappy. All misery comes from fear, from unsatisfied desire. Man will find 
that he never dies, and then he will have no more fear of death. When he knows 
that he is perfect, he will have no more vain desires, and both these causes 
being absent, there will be no more misery — there will be perfect bliss, even 
while in this body. 

There is only one method by which to attain this knowledge, that which is 
called concentration. The chemist in his laboratory concentrates all the energies 
of his mind into one focus, and throws them upon the materials he is analysing, 
and so finds out their secrets. The astronomer concentrates all the energies of 
his mind and projects them through his telescope upon the skies; and the stars, 
the sun, and the moon, give up their secrets to him. The more I can concentrate 
my thoughts on the matter on which I am talking to you, the more light I can 
throw upon you. You are listening to me, and the more you concentrate your 
thoughts, the more clearly you will grasp what I have to say. 

How has all the knowledge in the world been gained but by the concentration of 
the powers of the mind? The world is ready to give up its secrets if we only 
know how to knock, how to give it the necessary blow. The strength and force 
of the blow come through concentration. There is no limit to the power of the 
human mind. The more concentrated it is, the more power is brought to bear on 
one point; that is the secret. 

It is easy to concentrate the mind on external things, the mind naturally goes 
outwards; but not so in the case of religion, or psychology, or metaphysics, 
where the subject and the object, are one. The object is internal, the mind itself 
is the object, and it is necessary to study the mind itself — mind studying mind. 
We know that there is the power of the mind called reflection. I am talking to 
you. At the same time I am standing aside, as it were, a second person, and 
knowing and hearing what I am talking. You work and think at the same time, 
while a portion of your mind stands by and sees what you are thinking. The 
powers of the mind should be concentrated and turned back upon itself, and as 
the darkest places reveal their secrets before the penetrating rays of the sun, so 
will this concentrated mind penetrate its own innermost secrets. Thus will we 
come to the basis of belief, me real genuine religion. We will perceive for 


ourselves whether we have souls, whether life is of five minutes or of eternity, 
whether there is a God in the universe or more. It will all be revealed to us. This 
is what Raj a-Yoga proposes to teach. The goal of all its teaching is how to 
concentrate the minds, then, how to discover the innermost recesses of our own 
minds, then, how to generalise their contents and form our own conclusions 
from them. It, therefore, never asks the question what our religion is, whether 
we are Deists or Atheists, whether Christians, Jews, or Buddhists. We are 
human beings; that is sufficient. Every human being has the right and the power 
to seek; for religion. Every human being has the right to ask the reason, why, 
and to have his question answered by himself, if he only takes the trouble. 

So far, then, we see that in the study of this Raj a-Yoga no faith or belief is 
necessary. Believe nothing until you find it out for yourself; that is what it 
teaches us. Truth requires no prop to make it stand. Do you mean to say that the 
facts of our awakened state require any dreams or imaginings to prove them? 
Certainly not. This study of Raja-Yoga takes a long time and constant practice. 
A part of this practice is physical, but in the main it is mental. As we proceed 
we shall find how intimately the mind is connected with the body. If we believe 
that the mind is simply a finer part of the body, and that mind acts upon the 
body, then it stands to reason that the body must react upon the mind. If the 
body is sick, the mind becomes sick also. If the body is healthy, the mind 
remains healthy and strong. When one is angry, the mind becomes disturbed. 
Similarly when the mind is disturbed, the body also becomes disturbed. With 
the majority of mankind the mind is greatly under the control of the body, their 
mind being very little developed. The vast mass of humanity is very little 
removed from the animals. Not only so, but in many instances, the power of 
control in them is little higher than that of the lower animals. We have very 
little command of our minds. Therefore to bring that command about, to get 
that control over body and mind, we must take certain physical helps. When the 
body is sufficiently controlled, we can attempt the manipulation of the mind. 

By manipulating the mind, we shall be able to bring it under our control, make 
it work as we like, and compel it to concentrate its powers as we desire. 

According to the Raja-Yogi, the external world is but the gross form of the 
internal, or subtle. The finer is always the cause, the grosser the effect. So the 
external world is the effect, the internal the cause. In the same way external 


forces are simply the grosser parts, of which the internal forces are the finer. 

The man who has discovered and learned how to manipulate the internal forces 
will get the whole of nature under his control. The Yogi proposes to himself no 
less a task than to master the whole universe, to control the whole of nature. He 
wants to arrive at the point where what we call "nature's laws" will have no 
influence over him, where he will be able to get beyond them all. He will be 
master of the whole of nature, internal and external. The progress and 
civilisation of the human race simply mean controlling this nature. 

Different races take to different processes of controlling nature. Just as in the 
same society some individuals want to control the external nature, and others 
the internal, so, among races, some want to control the external nature, and 
others the internal. Some say that by controlling internal nature we control 
everything. Others that by controlling external nature we control everything. 
Carried to the extreme both are right, because in nature there is no such division 
as internal or external. These are fictitious limitations that never existed. The 
externalists and the internalists are destined to meet at the same point, when 
both reach the extreme of their knowledge. Just as a physicist, when he pushes 
his knowledge to its limits, finds it melting away into metaphysics, so a 
metaphysician will find that what he calls mind and matter are but apparent 
distinctions, the reality being One. 

The end and aim of all science is to find the unity, the One out of which the 
manifold is being manufactured, that One existing as many. Raj a-Yoga 
proposes to start from the internal world, to study internal nature, and through 
that, control the whole — both internal and external. It is a very old attempt. 
India has been its special stronghold, but it was also attempted by other nations. 
In Western countries it was regarded as mysticism and people who wanted to 
practice it were either burned or killed as witches and sorcerers. In India, for 
various reasons, it fell into the hands of persons who destroyed ninety per cent 
of the knowledge, and tried to make a great secret of the remainder. In modern 
times many so-called teachers have arisen in the West worse than those of 
India, because the latter knew something, while these modern exponents know 
nothing. 

Anything that is secret and mysterious in these systems of Yoga should be at 


once rejected. The best guide in life is strength. In religion, as in all other 
matters, discard everything that weakens you, have nothing to do with it. 
Mystery-mongering weakens the human brain. It has well-nigh destroyed Yoga 
— one of the grandest of sciences. From the time it was discovered, more than 
four thousand years ago. Yoga was perfectly delineated, formulated, and 
preached in India. It is a striking fact that the more modern the commentator the 
greater the mistakes he makes, while the more ancient the writer the more 
rational he is. Most of the modern writers talk of all sorts of mystery. Thus 
Yoga fell into the hands of a few persons who made it a secret, instead of 
letting the full blaze of daylight and reason fall upon it. They did so that they 
might have the powers to themselves. 

In the first place, there is no mystery in what I teach. What little I know I will 
tell you. So far as I can reason it out I will do so, but as to what I do not know I 
will simply tell you what the books say. It is wrong to believe blindly. You 
must exercise your own reason and judgment; you must practice, and see 
whether these things happen or not. Just as you would take up any other 
science, exactly in the same manner you should take up this science for study. 
There is neither mystery nor danger in it. So far as it is true, it ought to be 
preached in the public streets, in broad daylight. Any attempt to mystify these 
things is productive of great danger. 

Before proceeding further, I will tell you a little of the Sankhya philosophy, 
upon which the whole of Raja-Yoga is based. According to the Sankhya 
philosophy, the genesis of perception is as follows: the affections of external 
objects are carried by the outer instruments to their respective brain centres or 
organs, the organs carry the affections to the mind, the mind to the 
determinative faculty, from this the Purusha (the soul) receives them, when 
perception results. Next he gives the order back, as it were, to the motor centres 
to do the needful. With the exception of the Purusha all of these are material, 
but the mind is much finer matter than the external instruments. That material 
of which the mind is composed goes also to form the subtle matter called the 
Tanmatras. These become gross and make the external matter. That is the 
psychology of the Sankhya. So that between the intellect and the grosser matter 
outside there is only a difference in degree. The Purusha is the only thing which 
is immaterial. The mind is an instrument, as it were, in the hands of the soul. 


through which the soul catches external objects. The mind is constantly 
changing and vacillating, and can, when perfected, either attach itself to several 
organs, to one, or to none. For instance, if I hear the clock with great attention, I 
will not, perhaps, see anything although my eyes may be open, showing that the 
mind was not attached to the seeing organ, while it was to the hearing organ. 
But the perfected mind can be attached to all the organs simultaneously. It has 
the reflexive power of looking back into its own depths. This reflexive power is 
what the Yogi wants to again; by concentrating the powers of the mind, and 
turning them inward, he seeks to know what is happening inside. There is in 
this no question of mere belief; it is the analysis arrived at by certain 
philosophers. Modern physiologists tell us that the eyes are not the organ of 
vision, but that the organ is in one of the nerve centres of the brain, and so with 
all the senses; they also tell us that these centres are formed of the same 
material as the brain itself. The Sankhyas also tell us the same thing The former 
is a statement on the physical side, and the latter on the psychological side; yet 
both are the same. Our field of research lies beyond this. 

The Yogi proposes to attain that fine state of perception in which he can 
perceive all the different mental states. There must be mental perception of all 
of them. One can perceive how the sensation is travelling, how the mind is 
receiving it, how it is going to the determinative faculty, and how this gives it 
to the Purusha. As each science requires certain preparations and has its own 
method, which must be followed before it could be understood, even so in Raja- 
Yoga. 

Certain regulations as to food are necessary; we must use that food which 
brings us the purest mind. If you go into a menagerie, you will find this 
demonstrated at once. You see the elephants, huge animals, but calm and 
gentle; and if you go towards the cages of the lions and tigers, you find them 
restless, showing how much difference has been made by food. All the forces 
that are working in this body have been produced out of food; we see that every 
day. If you begin to fast, first your body will get weak, the physical forces will 
suffer; then after a few days, the mental forces will suffer also. First, memory 
will fail. Then comes a point, when you are not able to think, much less to 
pursue any course of reasoning. We have, therefore, to take care what sort of 
food we eat at the beginning, and when we have got strength enough, when our 


practice is well advanced, we need not be so careful in this respect. While the 
plant is growing it must be hedged round, lest it be injured; but when it 
becomes a tree, the hedges are taken away. It is strong enough to withstand all 
assaults 

A Yogi must avoid the two extremes of luxury and austerity. He must not fast, 
nor torture his flesh. He who does so, says the Gita, cannot be a Yogi: He who 
fasts, he who keeps awake, he who sleeps much, he who works too much, he 
who does no work, none of these can be a Yogi (Gita, VI, 16). 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER II 
THE FIRST STEPS 

Raj a-Yoga is divided into eight steps. The first is Yama — non-killing, 
truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and non-receiving of any gifts. Next is 
Niyama — cleanliness, contentment, austerity, study, and self-surrender to 
God. Then comes Asana, or posture; Pranayama, or control of Prana; 
Pratyahara, or restraint of the senses from their objects; Dharana, or fixing the 
mind on a spot; Dhyana, or meditation; and SamMhi, or superconsciousness. 
The Yama and Niyama, as we see, are moral trainings; without these as the 
basis no practice of Yoga will succeed. As these two become established, the 
Yogi will begin to realise the fruits of his practice; without these it will never 
bear fruit. A Yogi must not think of injuring anyone, by thought, word, or deed. 
Mercy shall not be for men alone, but shall go beyond, and embrace the whole 
world. 

The next step is Asana, posture. A series of exercises, physical and mental, is to 
be gone through every day, until certain higher states are reached. Therefore it 
is quite necessary that we should find a posture in which we can remain long. 
That posture which is the easiest for one should be the one chosen. For 
thinking, a certain posture may be very easy for one man, while to another it 
may be very difficult. We will find later on that during the study of these 
psychological matters a good deal of activity goes on in the body. Nerve 
currents will have to be displaced and given a new channel. New sorts of 
vibrations still begin, the whole constitution will be remodelled as it were. But 
the main part of the activity will lie along the spinal column, so that the one 
thing necessary for the posture is to hold the spinal column free, sitting erect, 
holding the three parts — the chest, neck, and head — in a straight line. Let the 
whole weight of the body be supported by the ribs, and then you have an easy 
natural postures with the spine straight. You will easily see that you cannot 
think very high thoughts with the chest in. This portion of the Yoga is a little 
similar to the Hatha-Yoga which deals entirely with the physical body, its aim 
being to make the physical body very strong. We have nothing to do with it 







here, because its practices are very difficult, and cannot be learned in a day, 
and, after all, do not lead to much spiritual growth. Many of these practices you 
will find in Delsarte and other teachers, such as placing the body in different 
postures, but the object in these is physical, not psychological. There is not one 
muscle in the body over which a man cannot establish a perfect control. The 
heart can be made to stop or go on at his bidding, and each part of the organism 
can be similarly controlled. 

The result of this branch of Yoga is to make men live long; health is the chief 
idea, the one goal of the Hatha-Yogi. He is determined not to fall sick, and he 
never does. He lives long; a hundred years is nothing to him; he is quite young 
and fresh when he is 150, without one hair turned grey. But that is all. A 
banyan tree lives sometimes 5000 years, but it is a banyan tree and nothing 
more. So, if a man lives long, he is only a healthy animal. One or two ordinary 
lessons of the Hatha-Yogis are very useful. For instance, some of you will find 
it a good thing for headaches to drink cold water through the nose as soon as 
you get up in the morning; the whole day your brain will be nice and cool, and 
you will never catch cold. It is very easy to do; put your nose into the water, 
draw it up through the nostrils and make a pump action in the throat. 

After one has learned to have a firm erect seat, one has to perform, according to 
certain schools, a practice called the purifying of the nerves. This part has been 
rejected by some as not belonging to Raj a-Yoga, but as so great an authority as 
the commentator Shankaracharya advises it, I think fit that it should be 
mentioned, and I will quote his own directions from his commentary on the 
Shvetashvatara Upanishad: "The mind whose dross has been cleared away by 
Pranayama, becomes fixed in Brahman; therefore Pranayama is declared. First 
the nerves are to be purified, then comes the power to practice Pranayama. 
Stopping the right nostril with the thumb, through the left nostril fill in air, 
according to capacity; then, without any interval, throw the air out through the 
right nostril, closing the left one. Again inhaling through the right nostril eject 
through the left, according to capacity; practicing this three or five times at four 
hours of the day, before dawn, during midday, in the evening, and at midnight, 
in fifteen days or a month purity of the nerves is attained; then begins 
Pranayama." 


Practice is absolutely necessary. You may sit down and listen to me by the hour 
every day, but if you do not practice, you will not get one step further. It all 
depends on practice. We never understand these things until we experience 
them. We will have to see and feel them for ourselves. Simply listening to 
explanations and theories will not do. There are several obstructions to 
practice. The first obstruction is an unhealthy body: if the body is not in a fit 
state, the practice will be obstructed. Therefore we have to keep the body in 
good health; we have to take care of what we eat and drink, and what we do. 
Always use a mental effort, what is usually called "Christian Science," to keep 
the body strong. That is all — nothing further of the body. We must not forget 
that health is only a means to an end. If health were the end, we would be like 
animals; animals rarely become unhealthy. 

The second obstruction is doubt; we always feel doubtful about things we do 
not see. Man cannot live upon words, however he may try. So, doubt comes to 
us as to whether there is any truth in these things or not; even the best of us will 
doubt sometimes: With practice, within a few days, a little glimpse will come, 
enough to give one encouragement and hope. As a certain commentator on 
Yoga philosophy says, "When one proof is obtained, however little that may 
be, it will give us faith in the whole teaching of Yoga." For instance, after the 
first few months of practice, you will begin to find you can read another's 
thoughts; they will come to you in picture form. Perhaps you will hear 
something happening at a long distance, when you concentrate your mind with 
a wish to hear. These glimpses will come, by little bits at first, but enough to 
give you faith, and strength, and hope. For instance, if you concentrate your 
thoughts on the tip of your nose, in a few days you will begin to smell most 
beautiful fragrance, which will be enough to show you that there are certain 
mental perceptions that can be made obvious without the contact of physical 
objects. But we must always remember that these are only the means; the aim, 
the end, the goal, of all this training is liberation of the soul. Absolute control 
of nature, and nothing short of it, must be the goal. We must be the masters, 
and not the slaves of nature; neither body nor mind must be our master, nor 
must we forget that the body is mine, and not I the body's. 

A god and a demon went to learn about the Self from a great sage. They 
studied with him for a long time. At last the sage told them, "You yourselves 



are the Being you are seeking." Both of them thought that their bodies were the 
Self. They went back to their people quite satisfied and said, "We have learned 
everything that was to be learned; eat, drink, and be merry; we are the Self; 
there is nothing beyond us." The nature of the demon was ignorant, clouded; so 
he never inquired any further, but was perfectly contented with the idea that he 
was God, that by the Self was meant the body. The god had a purer nature. He 
at first committed the mistake of thinking: I, this body, am Brahman: so keep it 
strong and in health, and well dressed, and give it all sorts of enjoyments. But, 
in a few days, he found out that that could not be the meaning of the sage, their 
master; there must be something higher. So he came back and said, "Sir, did 
you teach me that this body was the Self? If so, I see all bodies die; the Self 
cannot die." The sage said, "Find it out; thou art That." Then the god thought 
that the vital forces which work the body were what the sage meant. But. after 
a time, he found that if he ate, these vital forces remained strong, but, if he 
starved, they became weak. The god then went back to the sage and said, "Sir, 
do you mean that the vital forces are the Self ?" The sage said, "Find out for 
yourself; thou art That." The god returned home once more, thinking that it was 
the mind, perhaps, that was the Self. But in a short while he saw that thoughts 
were so various, now good, again bad; the mind was too changeable to be the 
Self. He went back to the sage and said, "Sir, I do not think that the mind is the 
Self; did you mean that?" "No," replied the sage, "thou art That; find out for 
yourself." The god went home, and at last found that he was the Self, beyond 
all thought, one without birth or death, whom the sword cannot pierce or the 
fire burn, whom the air cannot dry or the water melt, the beginningless and 
endless, the immovable, the intangible, the omniscient, the omnipotent Being; 
that It was neither the body nor the mind, but beyond them all. So he was 
satisfied; but the poor demon did not get the truth, owing to his fondness for the 
body. 

This world has a good many of these demoniac natures, but there are some 
gods too. If one proposes to teach any science to increase the power of sense- 
enjoyment, one finds multitudes ready for it. If one undertakes to show the 
supreme goal, one finds few to listen to him. Very few have the power to grasp 
the higher, fewer still the patience to attain to it. But there are a few also who 
know that even if the body can be made to live for a thousand years, the result 
in the end will be the same. When the forces that hold it together go away, the 


body must fall. No man was ever bom who could stop his body one moment 
from changing. Body is the name of a series of changes. "As in a river the 
masses of water are changing before you every moment, and new masses are 
coming, yet taking similar form, so is it with this body." Yet the body must be 
kept strong and healthy. It is the best instrument we have. 

This human body is the greatest body in the universe, and a human being the 
greatest being. Man is higher than all animals, than all angels; none is greater 
than man. Even the Devas (gods) will have to come down again and attain to 
salvation through a human body. Man alone attains to perfection, not even the 
Devas. According to the Jews and Mohammedans, God created man after 
creating the angels and everything else, and after creating man He asked the 
angels to come and salute him, and all did so except Iblis; so God cursed him 
and he became Satan. Behind this allegory is the great truth that this human 
birth is the greatest birth we can have. The lower creation, the animal, is dull, 
and manufactured mostly out of Tamas. Animals cannot have any high 
thoughts; nor can the angels, or Devas, attain to direct freedom without human 
birth. In human society, in the same way, too much wealth or too much poverty 
is a great impediment to the higher development of the soul. It is from the 
middle classes that the great ones of the world come. Here the forces are very 
equally adjusted and balanced. 

Returning to our subject, we come next to Pranayarna, controlling the 
breathing. What has that to do with concentrating the powers of the mind? 
Breath is like the fly-wheel of this machine, the body. In a big engine you find 
the fly-wheel first moving, and that motion is conveyed to finer and finer 
machinery until the most delicate and finest mechanism in the machine is in 
motion. The breath is that fly-wheel, supplying and regulating the motive 
power to everything in this body. 

There was once a minister to a great king. He fell into disgrace. The king, as a 
punishment, ordered him to be shut up in the top of a very high tower. This was 
done, and the minister was left there to perish. He had a faithful wife, however, 
who came to the tower at night and called to her husband at the top to know 
what she could do to help him. He told her to return to the tower the following 
night and bring with her a long rope, some stout twine, pack thread, silken 


thread, a beetle, and a little honey. Wondering much, the good wife obeyed her 
husband, and brought him the desired articles. The husband directed her to 
attach the silken thread firmly to the beetle, then to smear its horns with a drop 
of honey, and to set it free on the wall of the tower, with its head pointing 
upwards. She obeyed all these instructions, and the beetle started on its long 
journey. Smelling the honey ahead it slowly crept onwards, in the hope of 
reaching the honey, until at last it reached the top of the tower, when the 
minister grasped the beetle, and got possession of the silken thread. He told his 
wife to tie the other end to the pack thread, and after he had drawn up the pack 
thread, he repeated the process with the stout twine, and lastly with the rope. 
Then the rest was easy. The minister descended from the tower by means of the 
rope, and made his escape. In this body of ours the breath motion is the "silken 
thread"; by laying hold of and learning to control it we grasp the pack thread of 
the nerve currents, and from these the stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly the 
rope of Prana, controlling which we reach freedom. 

We do not know anything about our own bodies; we cannot know. At best we 
can take a dead body, and cut it in pieces, and there are some who can take a 
live animal and cut it in pieces in order to see what is inside the body. Still, that 
has nothing to do with our own bodies. We know very little about them. Why 
do we not? Because our attention is not discriminating enough to catch the very 
fine movements that are going on within. We can know of them only when the 
mind becomes more subtle and enters, as it were, deeper into the body. To get 
the subtle perception we have to begin with the grosser perceptions. We have to 
get hold of that which is setting the whole engine in motion. That is the Prana, 
the most obvious manifestation of which is the breath. Then, along with the 
breath, we shall slowly enter the body, which will enable us to find out about 
the subtle forces, the nerve currents that are moving all over the body. As soon 
as we perceive and learn to feel them, we shall begin to get control over them, 
and over the body. The mind is also set in motion: by these different nerve 
currents, so at last we shall reach the state of perfect control over the body and 
the mind, making both our servants. Knowledge is power. We have to get this 
power. So we must begin at the beginning, with Pranayama, restraining the 
Prana. This Pranayama is a long subject, and will take several lessons to 
illustrate it thoroughly. We shall take it part by part. 


We shall gradually see the reasons for each exercise and what forces in the 
body are set in motion. All these things will come to us, but it requires constant 
practice, and the proof will come by practice. No amount of reasoning which I 
can give, you will be proof to you, until you have demonstrated it for 
yourselves. As soon as you begin to feel these currents in motion all over you, 
doubts will vanish, but it requires hard practice every day. You must practice at 
least twice every day, and the best times are towards the morning and the 
evening. When night passes into day, and day into night, a state of relative 
calmness ensues. The early morning and the early evening are the two periods 
of calmness. Your body will have a like tendency to become calm at those 
times. We should take advantage of that natural condition and begin then to 
practice. Make it a rule not to eat until you have practiced; if you do this, the 
sheer force of hunger will break your laziness. In India they teach children 
never to eat until they have practiced or worshipped, and it becomes natural to 
them after a time; a boy will not feel hungry until he has bathed and practiced. 

Those of you who can afford it will do better to have a room for this practice 
alone. Do not sleep in that room, it must be kept holy. You must not enter the 
room until you have bathed, and are perfectly clean in body and mind. Place 
flowers in that room always; they are the best surroundings for a Yogi; also 
pictures that are pleasing. Burn incense morning and evening. Have no 
quarrelling, nor anger, nor unholy thought in that room. Only allow those 
persons to enter it who are of the same thought as you. Then gradually there 
will be an atmosphere of holiness in the room, so that when you are miserable, 
sorrowful, doubtful, or your mind is disturbed, the very fact of entering that 
room will make you calm. This was the idea of the temple and the church, and 
in some temples and churches you will find it even now, but in the majority of 
them the very idea has been lost. The idea is that by keeping holy vibrations 
there the place becomes and remains illumined. Those who cannot afford to 
have a room set apart can practice anywhere they like. Sit in a straight posture, 
and the first thing to do is to send a current of holy thought to all creation. 
Mentally repeat, "Let all beings be happy; let all beings be peaceful; let all 
beings be blissful." So do to the east, south, north and west. The more you do 
that the better you will feel yourself. You will find at last that the easiest way to 
make ourselves healthy is to see that others are healthy, and the easiest way to 
make ourselves happy is to see that others are happy. After doing that, those 


who believe in God should pray — not for money, not for health, nor for 
heaven; pray for knowledge and light; every other prayer is selfish. Then the 
next thing to do is to think of your own body, and see that it is strong and 
healthy; it is the best instrument you have. Think of it as being as strong as 
adamant, and that with the help of this body you will cross the ocean of life. 
Freedom is never to be reached by the weak. Throw away all weakness. Tell 
your body that it is strong, tell your mind that it is strong, and have unbounded 
faith and hope in yourself. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER III 
PRANA 

Pranayama is not, as many think, something about breath; breath indeed has 
very little to do with it, if anything. Breathing is only one of the many exercises 
through which we get to the real Pranayama. Pranayama means the control of 
Prana. According to the philosophers of India, the whole universe is composed 
of two materials, one of which they call Akasha. It is the omnipresent, all- 
penetrating existence. Everything that has form, everything that is the result of 
combination, is evolved out of this Akasha. It is the Akasha that becomes the 
air, that becomes the liquids, that becomes the solids; it is the Akasha that 
becomes the sun, the earth, the moon, the stars, the comets; it is the Akasha that 
becomes the human body, the animal body, the plants, every form that we see, 
everything that can be sensed, everything that exists. It cannot be perceived; it 
is so subtle that it is beyond all ordinary perception; it can only be seen when it 
has become gross, has taken form. At the beginning of creation there is only 
this Akasha. At the end of the cycle the solids, the liquids, and the gases all 
melt into the Akasha again, and the next creation similarly proceeds out of this 
Akasha. 

By what power is this Akasha manufactured into this universe? By the power 
of Prana. Just as Akasha is the infinite, omnipresent material of this universe, 
so is this Prana the infinite, omnipresent manifesting power of this universe. At 
the beginning and at the end of a cycle everything becomes Akasha, and all the 
forces that are in the universe resolve back into the Prana; in the next cycle, out 
of this Prana is evolved everything that we call energy, everything that we call 
force. It is the Prana that is manifesting as motion; it is the Prana that is 
manifesting as gravitation, as magnetism. It is the Prana that is manifesting as 
the actions of the body, as the nerve currents, as thought force. From thought 
down to the lowest force, everything is but the manifestation of Prana. The sum 
total of all forces in the universe, mental or physical, when resolved back to 
their original state, is called Prana. "When there was neither aught nor naught, 
when darkness was covering darkness, what existed then? That Akasha existed 






without motion." The physical motion of the Prana was stopped, but it existed 
all the same. 

At the end of a cycle the energies now displayed in the universe quiet down 
and become potential. At the beginning of the next cycle they start up, strike 
upon the Akasha, and out of the Akasha evolve these various forms, and as the 
Akasha changes, this Prana changes also into all these manifestations of 
energy. The knowledge and control of this Prana is really what is meant by 
Pranayama. 

This opens to us the door to almost unlimited power. Suppose, for instance, a 
man understood the Prana perfectly, and could control it, what power on earth 
would not be his? He would be able to move the sun and stars out of their 
places, to control everything in the universe, from the atoms to the biggest 
suns, because he would control the Prana. This is the end and aim of 
Pranayama. When the Yogi becomes perfect, there will be nothing in nature not 
under his control. If he orders the gods or the souls of the departed to come, 
they will come at his bidding. All the forces of nature will obey him as slaves. 
When the ignorant see these powers of the Yogi, they call them the miracles. 
One peculiarity of the Hindu mind is that it always inquires for the last possible 
generalization, leaving the details to be worked out afterwards. The question is 
raised in the Vedas, "What is that, knowing which, we shall know everything?" 
Thus, all books, and all philosophies that have been written, have been only to 
prove that by knowing which everything is known. If a man wants to know this 
universe bit by bit he must know every 

individual grain of sand, which means infinite time; he cannot know all of 
them. Then how can knowledge be? How is it possible for a man to be all¬ 
knowing through particulars? The Yogis say that behind this particular 
manifestation there is a generalization. Behind all particular ideas stands a 
generalized, an abstract principle; grasp it, and you have grasped everything. 
Just as this whole universe has been generalized in the Vedas into that One 
Absolute Existence, and he who has grasped that Existence has grasped the 
whole universe, so all forces have been generalised into this Prana, and he who 
has grasped the Prana has grasped all the forces of the universe, mental or 
physical. He who has controlled the Prana has controlled his own mind, and all 
the minds that exist. He who has controlled the Prana has controlled his body. 


and all the bodies that exist, because the Prana is the generalised manifestation 
of force. 

How to control the Prana is the one idea of Pranayama. All the trainings and 
exercises in this regard are for that one end. Each man must begin where he 
stands, must learn how to control the things that are nearest to him. This body 
is very near to us, nearer than anything in the external universe, and this mind 
is the nearest of all. The Prana which is working this mind and body is the 
nearest to us of all the Prana in this universe. This little wave of the Prana 
which represents our own energies, mental and physical, is the nearest to us of 
all the waves of the infinite ocean of Prana. If we can succeed in controlling 
that little wave, then alone we can hope to control the whole of Prana. The 
Yogi who has done this gains perfection; no longer is he under any power. He 
becomes almost almighty, almost all-knowing. We see sects in every country 
who have attempted this control of Prana. In this country there are Mind- 
healers, Faith-healers, Spiritualists, Christian Scientists, Hypnotists, etc., and if 
we examine these different bodies, we shall find at the back of each this control 
of the Prana, whether they know it or not. If you boil all their theories down, 
the residuum will be that. It is the one and the same force they are 
manipulating, only unknowingly. They have stumbled on the discovery of a 
force and are using it unconsciously without knowing its nature, but it is the 
same as the Yogi uses, and which comes from Prana. 

The Prana is the vital force in every being. Thought is the finest and highest 
action of Prana. Thought, again, as we see, is not all. There is also what we call 
instinct or unconscious thought, the lowest plane of action. If a mosquito stings 
us, our hand will strike it automatically, instinctively. This is one expression of 
thought. All reflex actions of the body belong to this plane of thought. There is 
again the other plane of thought, the conscious. I reason, I judge, I think, I see 
the pros and cons of certain things, yet that is not all. We know that reason is 
limited. Reason can go only to a certain extent, beyond that it cannot reach. 

The circle within which it runs is very very limited indeed. Yet at the same 
time, we find facts rush into this circle. Like the coming of comets certain 
things come into this circle; it is certain they come from outside the limit, 
although our reason cannot go beyond. The causes of the phenomena 
themselves in this small limit are outside of this limit. The mind can exist on a 


still higher plane, the superconscious. When the mind has attained to that state, 
which is called SamMhi — perfect concentration, superconsciousness — it 
goes beyond the limits of reason, and comes face to face with facts which no 
instinct or reason can ever know. All manipulations of the subtle forces of the 
body, the different manifestations of Prana, if trained, give a push to the mind, 
help it to go up higher, and become superconscious, from where it acts. 

In this universe there is one continuous substance on every plane of existence. 
Physically this universe is one: there is no difference between the sun and you. 
The scientist will tell you it is only a fiction to say the contrary. There is no real 
difference between the table and me; the table is one point in the mass of 
matter, and I another point. Each form represents, as it were, one whirlpool in 
the infinite ocean of matter, of which not one is constant. Just as in a rushing 
stream there may be millions of whirlpools, the water in each of which is 
different every moment, turning round and round for a few seconds, and then 
passing out, replaced by a fresh quantity, so the whole universe is one 
constantly changing mass of maker, in which all forms of existence are so 
many whirlpools. A mass of maker enters into one whirlpool, say a human 
body, stays there for a period, becomes changed, and goes out into another, say 
an animal body this time, from which again after a few years, it enters into 
another whirlpool, called a lump of mineral. It is a constant change. Not one 
body is constant. There is no such thing as my body, or your body, except in 
words. Of the one huge mass of matter, one point is called a moon, another a 
sun, another a man, another the earth, another a plant, another a mineral. Not 
one is constant, but everything is changing, matter eternally concreting and 
disintegrating. So it is with the mind. Matter is represented by the ether; when 
the action of Prana is most subtle, this very ether, in the finer state of vibration, 
will represent the mind and there it will be still one unbroken mass. If you can 
simply get to that subtle vibration, you will see and feel that the whole universe 
is composed of subtle vibrations. Sometimes certain drugs have the power to 
take us, while as yet in the senses, to that condition. Many of you may 
remember the celebrated experiment of Sir Humphry Davy, when the laughing 
gas overpowered him — how, during the lecture, he remained motionless, 
stupefied and after that, lie said that the whole universe was made up of ideas. 
For, the time being, as it were, the gross vibrations had ceased, and only the 
subtle vibrations which he called ideas, were present to him. He could only see 




the subtle vibrations round him; everything had become thought; the whole 
universe was an ocean of thought, he and everyone else had become little 
thought whirlpools. 

Thus, even in the universe of thought we find unity, and at last, when we get to 
the Self, we know that that Self can only be One. Beyond the vibrations of 
matter in its gross and subtle aspects, beyond motion there is but One. Even in 
manifested motion there is only unity. These facts can no more be denied. 
Modern physics also has demonstrated that the sum total of the energies in the 
universe is the same throughout. It has also been proved that this sum total of 
energy exists in two forms. It becomes potential, toned down, and calmed, and 
next it comes out manifested as all these various forces; again it goes back to 
the quiet state, and again it manifests. Thus it goes on evolving and involving 
through eternity. The control of this Prana, as before stated, is what is called 
Pranayama. 

The most obvious manifestation of this Prana in the human body is the motion 
of the lungs. If that stops, as a rule all the other manifestations of force in the 
body will immediately stop. But there are persons who can train themselves in 
such a manner that the body will live on, even when this motion has stopped. 
There are some persons who can bury themselves for days, and yet live without 
breathing. To reach the subtle we must take the help of the grosser, and so, 
slowly travel towards the most subtle until we gain our point. Pranayama really 
means controlling this motion of the lungs and this motion is associated with 
the breath. Not that breath is producing it; on the contrary it is producing 
breath. This motion draws in the air by pump action. The Prana is moving the 
lungs, the movement of the lungs draws in the air. So Pranayama is not 
breathing, but controlling that muscular power which moves the lungs. That 
muscular power which goes out through the nerves to the muscles and from 
them to the lungs, making them move in a certain manner, is the Prana, which 
we have to control in the practice of Pranayama. When the Prana has become 
controlled, then we shall immediately find that all the other actions of the Prana 
in the body will slowly come under control. I myself have seen men who have 
controlled almost every muscle of the body; and why not? If I have control 
over certain muscles, why not over every muscle and nerve of the body? What 
impossibility is there? At present the control is lost, and the motion has become 


automatic. We cannot move our ears at will, but we know that animals can. We 
have not that power because we do not exercise it. This is what is called 
atavism. 

Again, we know that motion which has become latent can be brought back to 
manifestation. By hard work and practice certain motions of the body which 
are most dormant can be brought back under perfect control. Reasoning thus 
we find there is no impossibility, but, on the other hand, every probability that 
each part of the body can be brought under perfect control. This the Yogi does 
through Pranayama. Perhaps some of you have read that in Pranayama, when 
drawing in the breath, you must fill your whole body with Prana. In the English 
translations Prana is given as breath, and you are inclined to ask how that is to 
be done. The fault is with the translator. Every part of the body can be filled 
with Prana, this vital force, and when you are able to do that, you can control 
the whole body. All the sickness and misery felt in the body will be perfectly 
controlled; not only so, you will be able to control another's body. Everything 
is infectious in this world, good or bad. If your body be in a certain state of 
tension, it will have a tendency to produce the same tension in others. If you 
are strong and healthy, those that live near you will also have the tendency to 
become strong and healthy, but if you are sick and weak, those around you will 
have the tendency to become the same. In the case of one man trying to heal 
another, the first idea is simply transferring his own health to the other. This is 
the primitive sort of healing. Consciously or unconsciously, health can be 
transmitted. A very strong man, living with a weak man, will make him a little 
stronger, whether he knows it or not. When consciously done, it becomes 
quicker and better in its action. Next come those cases in which a man may not 
be very healthy himself, yet we know that he can bring health to another. The 
first man, in such a case, has a little more control over the Prana, and can rouse, 
for the time being, his Prana, as it were, to a certain state of vibration, and 
transmit it to another person. 

There have been cases where this process has been carried on at a distance, but 
in reality there is no distance in the sense of a break. Where is the distance that 
has a break? Is there any break between you and the sun? It is a continuous 
mass of matter, the sun being one part, and you another. Is there a break 
between one part of a river and another? Then why cannot any force travel? 


There is no reason against it. Cases of healing from a distance are perfectly 
true. The Prana can be transmitted to a very great distance; but to one genuine 
case, there are hundreds of frauds. This process of healing is no so easy as it is 
thought to be. In the most ordinary cases of such healing you will find that the 
healers simply take advantage of the naturally healthy state of the human body. 
An allopath comes and treats cholera patients, and gives them his medicines. 
The homoeopath comes and gives his medicines, and cures perhaps more than 
the allopath does, because the homeopath does not disturb his patients, but 
allows nature to deal with them. The Faith-healer cures more still, because he 
brings the strength of his mind to bear, and rouses, through faith, the dormant 
Prana of the patient. 

There is a mistake constantly made by Faith-healers: they think that faith 
directly heals a man. But faith alone does not cover all the ground. There are 
diseases where the worst symptoms are that the patient never thinks that he has 
that disease. That tremendous faith of the patient is itself one symptom of the 
disease, and usually indicates that he will die quickly. In such cases the 
principle that faith cures does not apply. If it were faith alone that cured, these 
patients also would be cured. It is by the Prana that real curing comes. The pure 
man,, who has controlled the Prana, has the power of bringing it into a certain 
state of vibration, which can be conveyed to others, arousing in them a similar 
vibration. You see that in everyday actions. I am talking to you. What am I 
trying to do? I am, so to say, bringing my mind to a certain state of vibration, 
and the more I succeed in bringing it to that state, the more you will be affected 
by what I say. All of you know that the day I am more enthusiastic, the more 
you enjoy the lecture; and when I am less enthusiastic, you feel lack of interest. 

The gigantic will-powers of the world, the world-movers, can bring their Prana 
into a high state of vibration, and it is so great and powerful that it catches 
others in a moment, and thousands are drawn towards them, and half the world 
think as they do. Great prophets of the world had the most wonderful control of 
the Prana, which gave them tremendous will-power; they had brought their 
Prana to the highest state of motion, and this is what gave them power to sway 
the world. All manifestations of power arise from this control. Men may not 
know the secret, but this is the one explanation. Sometimes in your own body 
the supply of Prana gravitates more or less to one part; the balance is disturbed. 


and when the balance of Prana is disturbed, what we call disease is produced. 
To take away the superfluous Prana, or to supply the Prana that is wanting, will 
be curing the disease. That again is Pranayama — to learn when there is more 
or less Prana in one part of the body than there should be. The feelings will 
become so subtle that the mind will feel that there is less Prana in the toe or the 
finger than there should be, and will possess the power to supply it. These are 
among the various functions of Pranayama. They have to be learned slowly and 
gradually, and as you see, the whole scope of Raj a-Yoga is really to teach the 
control and direction in different planes of the Prana. When a man has 
concentrated his energies, he masters the Prana that is in his body. When a man 
is meditating, he is also concentrating the Prana. 

In an ocean there are huge waves, like mountains, then smaller waves, and still 
smaller, down to little bubbles, but back of all these is the infinite ocean. The 
bubble is connected with the infinite ocean at one end, and the huge wave at the 
other end. So, one may be a gigantic man, and another a little bubble, but each 
is connected with that infinite ocean of energy, which is the common birthright 
of every animal that exists. Wherever there is life, the storehouse of infinite 
energy is behind it. Starting as some fungus, some very minute, microscopic 
bubble, and all the time drawing from that infinite store-house of energy, a 
form is changed slowly and steadily until in course of time it becomes a plant, 
then an animal, then man, ultimately God. This is attained through millions of 
aeons, but what is time? An increase of speed, an increase of struggle, is able to 
bridge the gulf of time. 

That which naturally takes a long time to accomplish can be shortened by the 
intensity of the action, says the Yogi. A man may go on slowly drawing in this 
energy from the infinite mass that exists in the universe, and, perhaps, he will 
require a hundred thousand years to become a Deva, and then, perhaps, five 
hundred thousand years to become still higher, and, perhaps, five millions of 
years to become perfect. Given rapid growth, the time will be lessened. Why is 
it not possible, with sufficient effort, to reach this very perfection in six months 
or six years? There is no limit. Reason shows that. If an engine, with a certain 
amount of coal, runs two miles an hour, it will run the distance in less time with 
a greater supply of coal. Similarly, why shall not the soul, by intensifying its 
action, attain perfection in this very life? All beings will at last attain to that 
goal, we know. But who cares to wait all these millions of aeons? Why not 


reach it immediately, in this body even, in this human form? Why shall I not 
get that infinite knowledge, infinite power, now? 

The ideal of the Yogi, the whole science of Yoga, is directed to the end of 
teaching men how, by intensifying the power of assimilation, to shorten the 
time for reaching perfection, instead of slowly advancing from point to point 
and waiting until the whole human race has become perfect. All the great 
prophets, saints, and seers of the world — what did they do? In one span of life 
they lived the whole life of humanity, traversed the whole length of time that it 
takes ordinary humanity to come to perfection. In one life they perfect 
themselves; they have no thought for anything else, never live a moment for 
any other idea, and thus the way is shortened for them. This is what is meant by 
concentration, intensifying the power of assimilation, thus shortening the time. 
Raj a-Yoga is the science which teaches us how to gain the power of 
concentration. 

What has Pranayama to do with spiritualism? Spiritualism is also a 
manifestation of Pranayama. If it be true that the departed spirits exist, only we 
cannot see them, it is quite probable that there may be hundreds and millions of 
them about us we can neither see, feel, nor touch. We may be continually 
passing and repassing through their bodies, and they do not see or feel us. It is a 
circle within a circle, universe within universe. We have five senses, and we 
represent Prana in a certain state of vibration. All beings in the same state of 
vibration will see one another, but if there are beings who represent Prana in a 
higher state of vibration, they will not be seen. We may increase the intensity 
of a light until we cannot see it at all, but there may be beings with eyes so 
powerful that they can see such light. Again, if its vibrations are very low, we 
do not see a light, but there are animals that may see it, as cats and owls. Our 
range of vision is only one plane of the vibrations of this Prana. Take this 
atmosphere, for instance; it is piled up layer on layer, but the layers nearer to 
the earth are denser than those above, and as you go higher the atmosphere 
becomes finer and finer. Or take the case of the ocean; as you go deeper and 
deeper the pressure of the water increases, and animals which live at the bottom 
of the sea can never come up, or they will be broken into pieces. 

Think of the universe as an ocean of ether, consisting of layer after layer of 



varying degrees of vibration under the action of Prana; away from the centre 
the vibrations are less, nearer to it they become quicker and quicker; one order 
of vibration makes one plane. Then suppose these ranges of vibrations are cut 
into planes, so many millions of miles one set of vibration, and then so many 
millions of miles another still higher set of vibration, and so on. It is, therefore, 
probable, that those who live on the plane of a certain state of vibration will 
have the power of recognising one another, but will not recognise those above 
them. Yet, just as by the telescope and the microscope we can increase the 
scope of our vision, similarly we can by Yoga bring ourselves to the state of 
vibration of another plane, and thus enable ourselves to see what is going on 
there. Suppose this room is full of beings whom we do not see. They represent 
Prana in a certain state of vibration while we represent another. Suppose they 
represent a quick one, and we the opposite. Prana is the material of which the: 
are composed, as well as we. All are parts of the same ocean of Prana, they 
differ only in their rate of vibration. If I can bring myself to the quick vibration, 
this plane will immediately change for me: I shall not see you any more; you 
vanish and they appear. Some of you, perhaps, know this to be true. All this 
bringing of the mind into a higher state of vibration is included in one word in 
Yoga — Sarnadhi. All these states of higher vibration, superconscious 
vibrations of the mind, are grouped in that one word, Sarnadhi, and the lower 
states of Sarnadhi give us visions of these beings. The highest grade of 
Sarnadhi is when we see the real thing, when we see the material out of which 
the whole of these grades of beings are composed, and that one lump of clay 
being known, we know all the clay in the universe. 

Thus we see that Pranayama includes all that is true of spiritualism even. 
Similarly, you will find that wherever any sect or body of people is trying to 
search out anything occult and mystical, or hidden, what they are doing is 
really this Yoga, this attempt to control the Prana. You will find that wherever 
there is any extraordinary display of power, it is the manifestation of this Prana. 
Even the physical sciences can be included in Pranayama. What moves the 
steam engine? Prana, acting through the steam. What are all these phenomena 
of electricity and so forth but Prana? What is physical science? The science of 
Pranayama, by external means. Prana, manifesting itself as mental power, can 
only be controlled by mental means. That part of Pranayama which attempts to 
control the manifestations of the Prana as mental force by mental means is 



called Raj a-Yoga. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER IV 
THE PSYCHIC PRANA 

According to the Yogis, there are two nerve currents in the spinal column, 
called Pingala and Ida, and a hollow canal called Sushumna running through 
the spinal cord. At the lower end of the hollow canal is what the Yogis call the 
"Lotus of the Kundalini". They describe it as triangular in form in which, in the 
symbolical language of the Yogis, there is a power called the Kundalini, coiled 
up. When that Kundalini awakes, it tries to force a passage through this hollow 
canal, and as it rises step by step, as it were, layer after layer of the mind 
becomes open and all the different visions and wonderful powers come to the 
Yogi when it reaches the brain, the Yogi is perfectly detached from the body 
and mind; the soul finds itself free. We know that the spinal cord is composed 
in a peculiar manner. If we take the figure eight horizontally (oo) there are two 
parts which are connected in the middle. Suppose you add eight after eight, 
piled one on top of the other, that will represent the spinal cord. The left is the 
Ida, the right Pingala, and that hollow canal which runs through the centre of 
the spinal cord is the Sushumna. Where the spinal cord ends in some of the 
lumbar vertebrae, a fine fibre issues downwards, and the canal run; up even 
within that fibre, only much finer. The canal is closed at the lower end, which 
is situated near what is called the sacral plexus, which, according to modern 
physiology, is triangular in form. The different plexuses that have their centres 
in the spinal canal can very well stand for the different "lotuses" of the Yogi. 

The Yogi conceives of several centres, beginning with the Muladhara, the 
basic, and ending with the Sahasrara, the thousand-petalled Lotus in the brain. 
So, if we take these different plexuses as representing these lotuses, the idea of 
the Yogi can be understood very easily in the language of modern physiology. 
We know there are two sorts of actions in these nerve currents, one afferent, the 
other efferent; one sensory and the other motor; one centripetal, and the other 
centrifugal. One carries the sensations to the brain, and the other from the brain 
to the outer body. These vibrations are all connected with the brain in the long 
run. Several other facts we have to remember, in order to clear the way for the 






explanation which is to come. This spinal cord, at the brain, ends in a sort of 
bulb, in the medulla, which is not attached to the brain, but floats in a fluid in 
the brain, so that if there be a blow on the head the force of that blow will be 
dissipated in the fluid, and will not hurt the bulb. This is an important fact to 
remember. Secondly, we have also to know that, of all the centres, we have 
particularly to remember three, the Muladhara (the basic), the Sahasrara (the 
thousand-petalled lotus of the brain) and the Manipura (the lotus of the navel). 

Next we shall take one fact from physics. We all hear of electricity and various 
other forces connected with it. What electricity is no one knows, but so far as it 
is known, it is a sort of motion. There are various other motions in the universe; 
what is the difference between them and electricity? Suppose this table moves 
— that the molecules which compose this table are moving in different 
directions; if they are all made to move in the same direction, it will be through 
electricity. Electric motion makes the molecules of a body move in the same 
direction. If all the air molecules in a room are made to move in the same 
direction, it will make a gigantic battery of electricity of the room. Another 
point from physiology we must remember, that the centre which regulates the 
respiratory system, the breathing system has a sort of controlling action over 
the system of nerve currents. 

Now we shall see why breathing is practiced. In the first place, from rhythmical 
breathing comes a tendency of all the molecules in the body to move in the 
same direction. When mind changes into will, the nerve currents change into a 
motion similar to electricity, because the nerves have been proved to show 
polarity under the action of electric currents. This shows that when the will is 
transformed into the nerve currents, it is changed into something like 
electricity. When all the motions of the body have become perfectly 
rhythmical, the body has, as it were, become a gigantic battery of will. This 
tremendous will is exactly what the Yogi wants. This is, therefore, a 
physiological explanation of the breathing exercise. It tends to bring a rhythmic 
action in the body, and helps us, through the respiratory centre, to control the 
other centres. The aim of Pranayama here is to rouse the coiled-up power in the 
Muladhara, called the Kundalini. 

Everything that we see, or imagine, or dream, we have to perceive in space. 



This is the ordinary space, called the Mahakasha, or elemental space. When a 
Yogi reads the thoughts of other men, or perceives supersensuous objects he 
sees them in another sort of space called the Chittakasha, the mental space. 
When perception has become objectless, and the soul shines in its own nature, 
it is called the Chidakasha, or knowledge space. When the Kundalini is 
aroused, and enters the canal of the Sushuma, all the perceptions are in the 
mental space. When it has reached that end of the canal which opens out into 
the brain, the objectless perception is in the knowledge space. Taking the 
analogy of electricity, we find that man can send a current only along a wire, 
(The reader should remember that this was spoken before the discovery of wireless telegraphy. 
— Ed.) but nature requires no wires to send her tremendous currents. This 
proves that the wire is not really necessary, but that only our inability to 
dispense with it compels us to use it. 

Similarly, all the sensations and motions of the body are being sent into the 
brain, and sent out of it, through these wires of nerve fibres. The columns of 
sensory and motor fibres in the spinal cord are the Ida and Pingala of the Yogis. 
They are the main channels through which the afferent and efferent currents 
travel. But why should not the mind send news without any wire, or react 
without any wire? We see this is done in nature. The Yogi says, if you can do 
that, you have got rid of the bondage of matter. How to do it? If you can make 
the current pass through the Sushumna, the canal in the middle of the spinal 
column, you have solved the problem. The mind has made this network of the 
nervous system, and has to break it, so that no wires will be required to work 
through. Then alone will all knowledge come to us — no more bondage of 
body; that is why it is so important that we should get control of that 
Sushumna. If we can send the mental current through the hollow canal without 
any nerve fibres to act as wires, the Yogi says, the problem is solved, and he 
also says it can be done. 

This Sushumna is in ordinary persons closed up at the lower extremity; no 
action comes through it. The Yogi proposes a practice by which it can be 
opened, and the nerve currents made to travel through. When a sensation is 
carried to a centre, the centre reacts. This reaction, in the case of automatic 
centres, is followed by motion; in the case of conscious centres it is followed 
first by perception, and secondly by motion. All perception is the reaction to 



action from outside. How, then, do perceptions in dreams arise? There is then 
no action from outside. The sensory motions, therefore, are coiled up 
somewhere. For instance, I see a city; the perception of that city is from the 
reaction to the sensations brought from outside objects comprising that city. 
That is to say, a certain motion in the brain molecules has been set up by the 
motion in the incarrying nerves, which again are set in motion by external 
objects in the city. Now, even after a long time I can remember the city. This 
memory is exactly the same phenomenon, only it is in a milder form. But 
whence is the action that sets up even the milder form of similar vibrations in 
the brain? Not certainly from the primary sensations. Therefore it must be that 
the sensations are coiled up somewhere, and they, by their acting, bring out the 
mild reaction which we call dream perception. 

Now the centre where all these residual sensations are, as it were, stored up, is 
called the Muladhara, the root receptacle, and the coiled-up energy of action is 
Kundalini, "the coiled up". It is very probable that the residual motor energy is 
also stored up in the same centre, as, after deep study or meditation on external 
objects, the part of the body where the Muladhara centre is situated (probably 
the sacral plexus) gets heated. Now, if this coiled-up energy be roused and 
made active, and then consciously made to travel up the Sushumna canal, as it 
acts upon centre after centre, a tremendous reaction will set in. When a minute 
portion of energy travels along a nerve fibre and causes reaction from centres, 
the perception is either dream or imagination. But when by the power of long 
internal meditation the vast mass of energy stored up travels along the 
Sushumna, and strikes the centres, the reaction is tremendous, immensely 
superior to the reaction of dream or imagination, immensely more intense than 
the reaction of sense-perception. It is super-sensuous perception. And when it 
reaches the metropolis of all sensations, the brain, the whole brain, as it were, 
reacts, and the result is the full blaze of illumination, the perception of the Self. 
As this Kundalini force travels from centre to centre, layer after layer of the 
mind, as it were, opens up, and this universe is perceived by the yogi in its fine, 
or causal form. Then alone the causes of this universe, both as sensation and 
reaction, are known as they are, and hence comes all knowledge. The causes 
being known, the knowledge of the effects is sure to follow. 

Thus the rousing of the Kundalini is the one and only way to attaining Divine 


Wisdom, superconscious perception, realisation of the spirit. The rousing may 
come in various ways, through love for God, through the mercy of perfected 
sages, or through the power of the analytic will of the philosopher. Wherever 
there was any manifestation of what is ordinarily called supernatural power or 
wisdom, there a little current of Kundalini must have found its way into the 
Sushumna. Only, in the vast majority of such cases, people had ignorantly 
stumbled on some practice which set free a minute portion of the coiled-up 
Kundalini. All worship, consciously or unconsciously, leads to this end. The 
man who thinks that he is receiving response to his prayers does not know that 
the fulfilment comes from his own nature, that he has succeeded by the mental 
attitude of prayer in waking up a bit of this infinite power which is coiled up 
within himself. What, thus, men ignorantly worship under various names, 
through fear and tribulation, the Yogi declares to the world to be the real power 
coiled up in every being, the mother of eternal happiness, if we but know how 
to approach her. And Raj a-Yoga is the science of religion, the rationale of all 
worship, all prayers, forms, ceremonies, and miracles. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER V 

THE CONTROL OF PSYCHIC PRANA 

We have now to deal with the exercises in Pranayama. We have seen that the 
first step, according to the Yogis, is to control the motion of the lungs. What we 
want to do is to feel the finer motions that are going on in the body. Our minds 
have become externalised, and have lost sight of the fine motions inside. If we 
can begin to feel them, we can begin to control them. These nerve currents go 
on all over the body, bringing life and vitality to every muscle, but we do not 
feel them. The Yogi says we can learn to do so. How? By taking up and 
controlling the motion of the lungs; when we have done that for a sufficient 
length of time, we shall be able to control the finer motions. 

We now come to the exercises in Pranayama. Sit upright; the body must be 
kept straight. The spinal cord, although not attached to the vertebral column, is 
yet inside of it. If you sit crookedly you disturb this spinal cord, so let it be free. 
Any time that you sit crookedly and try to meditate you do yourself an injury. 
The three parts of the body, the chest, the neck, and the head, must be always 
held straight in one line. You will find that by a little practice this will come to 
you as easy as breathing. The second thing is to get control of the nerves. We 
have said that the nerve centre that controls the respiratory organs has a sort of 
controlling effect on the other nerves, and rhythmical breathing is, therefore, 
necessary. The breathing that we generally use should not be called breathing 
at all. It is very irregular. Then there are some natural differences of breathing 
between men and women. 

The first lesson is just to breathe in a measured way, in and out. That will 
harmonise the system. When you have practiced this for some time, you will do 
well to join to it the repetition of some word as "Om," or any other sacred 
word. In India we use certain symbolical words instead of counting one, two, 
three, four. That is why I advise you to join the mental repetition of the "Om," 
or some other sacred word to the Pranayama. Let the word flow in and out with 
the breath, rhythmically, harmoniously, and you will find the whole body is 






becoming rhythmical. Then you will learn what rest is. Compared with it, sleep 
is not rest. Once this rest comes the most tired nerves will be calmed down, and 
you will find that you have never before really rested. 

The first effect of this practice is perceived in the change of expression of one's 
face; harsh lines disappear; with calm thought calmness comes over the face. 
Next comes beautiful voice. I never saw a Yogi with a croaking voice. These 
signs come after a few months' practice. After practicing the above mentioned 
breathing for a few days, you should take up a higher one. Slowly fill the lungs 
with breath through the Ida, the left nostril, and at the same time concentrate 
the mind on the nerve current. You are, as it were, sending the nerve current 
down the spinal column, and striking violently on the last plexus, the basic 
lotus which is triangular in form, the seat of the Kundalini. Then hold the 
current there for some tune. Imagine that you are slowly drawing that nerve 
current with the breath through the other side, the Pingala, then slowly throw it 
out through the right nostril. This you 

will find a little difficult to practice. The easiest way is to stop the right nostril 
with the thumb, and then slowly draw in the breath through the left; then close 
both nostrils with thumb and forefinger, and imagine that you are sending that 
current down, and striking the base of the Sushumna; then take the thumb off, 
and let the breath out through the right nostril. Next inhale slowly through that 
nostril, keeping the other closed by the forefinger, then close both, as before. 
The way the Hindus practice this would be very difficult for this country, 
because they do it from their childhood, and their lungs are prepared for it. 

Here it is well to begin with four seconds, and slowly increase. Draw in four 
seconds, hold in sixteen seconds, then throw out in eight seconds. This makes 
one Pranayama. At the same time think of the basic lotus, triangular in form; 
concentrate the mind on that centre. The imagination can help you a great deal. 
The next breathing is slowly drawing the breath in, and then immediately 
throwing it out slowly, and then stopping the breath out, using the same 
numbers. The only difference is that in the first case the breath was held in, and 
in the second, held out. This last is the easier one. The breathing in which you 
hold the breath in the lungs must not be practiced too much. Do it only four 
times in the morning, and four times in the evening. Then you can slowly 
increase the time and number. You will find that you have the power to do so, 
and that you take pleasure in it. So very carefully and cautiously increase as 


you feel that you have the power, to six instead of four. It may injure you if you 
practice it irregularly. 

Of the three processes for the purification of the nerves, described above, the 
first and the last are neither difficult nor dangerous. The more you practice the 
first one the calmer you will be. Just think of "Om," and you can practice even 
while you are sitting at your work. You will be all the better for it. Some day, if 
you practice hard, the Kundalini will be aroused. For those who practice once 
or twice a day, just a little calmness of the body and mind will come, and 
beautiful voice; only for those who can go on further with it will Kundalini be 
aroused, and the whole of nature will begin to change, and the book of 
knowledge will open. No more will you need to go to books for knowledge; 
your own mind will have become your book, containing infinite knowledge. I 
have already spoken of the Ida and Pingala currents, flowing through either 
side of the spinal column, and also of the Sushumna, the passage through the 
centre of the spinal cord. These three are present in every animal; whatever 
being has a spinal column has these three lines of action. But the Yogis claim 
that in an ordinary man the Sushumna is closed; its action is not evident while 
that of the other two is carrying power to different parts of the body. 

The Yogi alone has the Sushumna open. When this Sushumna current opens, 
and begins to rise, we get beyond the sense, our minds become supersensuous, 
supcrconscious — we get beyond even the intellect, where reasoning cannot 
reach. To open that Sushumna is the prime object of the Yogi. According to 
him, along this Sushumna are ranged these centres, or, in more figurative 
language, these lotuses, as they are called. The lowest one is at the lower end of 
the spinal cord, and is called MulMhara, the next higher is called 
Svadhishthana, the third Manipura, the fourth Anahata, the fifth Vishuddha, the 

A. 

sixth Ajna and the last, which is in the brain, is the Sahasrara, or "the thousand- 
petalled". Of these we have to take cognition just now of two centres only, the 
lowest, the Muladhara, and the highest, the Sahasrara. All energy has to be 
taken up from its seat in the Muladhara and brought to the Sahasrara. The 
Yogis claim that of all the energies that are in the human body the highest is 
what they call "Ojas". Now this Ojas is stored up in the brain, and the more 
Ojas is in a man's head, the more powerful he is, the more intellectual, the more 
spiritually strong. One man may speak beautiful language and beautiful 



thoughts, but they, do not impress people; another man speaks neither beautiful 
language nor beautiful thoughts, yet his words charm. Every movement of his 
is powerful. That is the power of Ojas. 

Now in every man there is more or less of this Ojas stored up. All the forces 
that are working in the body in their highest become Ojas. You must remember 
that it is only a question of transformation. The same force which is working 
outside as electricity or magnetism will become changed into inner force; the 
same forces that are working as muscular energy will be changed into Ojas. 

The Yogis say that that part of the human energy which is expressed as sex 
energy, in sexual thought, when checked and controlled, easily becomes 
changed into Ojas, and as the Muladhara guides these, the Yogi pays particular 
attention to that centre. He tries to take up all his sexual energy and convert it 
into Ojas. It is only the chaste man or woman who can make the Ojas rise and 
store it in the brain; that is why charity has always been considered the highest 
virtue. A man feels that if he is unchaste, spirituality goes away, he loses 
mental vigour and moral stamina That is why in all the religious orders in the 
world which have produced spiritual giants you will always find absolute 
chastity insisted upon. That is why the monks came into existence, giving up 
marriage. There must be perfect chastity in thought, word, and deed; without it 
the practice of Raja-Yoga is dangerous, and may lead to insanity. If people 
practice Raj a-Yoga and at the same time lead an impure life, how can they 
expect to become Yogis? 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VI 

PRATYAHARA AND DHARANA 

The next step is called Pratyahara. What is this? You know how perceptions 
come. First of all there are the external instruments, then the internal organs 
acting in the body through the brain centres, and there is the mind. When these 
come together and attach themselves to some external object, then we perceive 
it. At the same time it is a very difficult thing to concentrate the mind and 
attach it to one organ only; the mind is a slave. 

We hear "Be good," and "Be good," and "Be good," taught all over the world. 
There is hardly a child, bom in any country in the world, who has not been 
told, "Do not steal," "Do not tell a lie," but nobody tells the child how he can 
help doing them. Talking will not help him. Why should he not become a thief? 
We do not teach him how not to steal; we simply tell him, "Do not steal." Only 
when we teach him to control his mind do we really help him. All actions, 
internal and external, occur when the mind joins itself to certain centres, called 
the organs. Willingly or unwillingly it is drawn to join itself to the centres, and 
that is why people do foolish deeds and feel miserable, which, if the mind were 
under control, they would not do. What would be the result of controlling the 
mind? It then would not join itself to the centres of perception, and, naturally, 
feeling and willing would be under control. It is clear so far. Is it possible? It is 
perfectly possible. You see it in modern times; the faith-healers teach people to 
deny misery and pain and evil. Their philosophy is rather roundabout, but it is a 
part of Yoga upon which they have somehow stumbled. Where they succeed in 
making a person throw off suffering by denying it, they really use a part of 
Pratyahara, as they make the mind of the person strong enough to ignore the 
senses. The hypnotists in a similar manner, by their suggestion, excite in the 
patient a sort of morbid Pratyahara for the time being. The so-called hypnotic 
suggestion can only act upon a weak mind. And until the operator, by means of 
fixed gaze or otherwise, has succeeded in putting the mind of the subject in a 
sort of passive, morbid condition, his suggestions never work. 






Now the control of the centres which is established in a hypnotic patient or the 
patient of faith-healing, by the operator, for a time, is reprehensible, because it 
leads to ultimate ruin. It is not really controlling the brain centres by the power 
of one's own will, but is, as it were, stunning the patient's mind for a time by 
sudden blows which another's will delivers to it. It is not checking by means of 
reins and muscular strength the mad career of a fiery team, but rather by asking 
another to deliver heavy blows on the heads of the horses, to stun them for a 
time into gentleness. At each one of these processes the man operated upon 
loses a part of his mental energies, till at last, the mind, instead of gaining the 
power of perfect control, becomes a shapeless, powerless mass, and the only 
goal of the patient is the lunatic asylum. 

Every attempt at control which is not voluntary, not with the controller's own 
mind, is not only disastrous, but it defeats the end. The goal of each soul is 
freedom, mastery — freedom from the slavery of matter and thought, mastery 
of external and internal nature. Instead of leading towards that, every will- 
current from another, in whatever form it comes, either as direct control of 
organs, or as forcing to control them while under a morbid condition, only 
rivets one link more to the already existing heavy chain of bondage of past 
thoughts, past superstitions. Therefore, beware how you allow yourselves to be 
acted upon by others. Beware how you unknowingly bring another to ruin. 
True, some succeed in doing good to many for a time, by giving a new trend to 
their propensities, but at the same time, they bring ruin to millions by the 
unconscious suggestions they throw around, rousing in men and women that 
morbid, passive, hypnotic condition which makes them almost soulless at last. 
Whosoever, therefore, asks any one to believe blindly, or drags people behind 
him by the controlling power of his superior will, does an injury to humanity, 
though he may not intend it. 

Therefore use your own minds, control body and mind yourselves, remember 
that until you are a diseased person, no extraneous will can work upon you; 
avoid everyone, however great and good he may be, who asks you to believe 
blindly. All over the world there have been dancing and jumping and howling 
sects, who spread like infection when they begin to sing and dance and preach; 
they also are a sort of hypnotists. They exercise a singular control for the time 
being over sensitive persons, alas! often, in the long run, to degenerate whole 



races. Ay, it is healthier for the individual or the race to remain wicked than be 
made apparently good by such morbid extraneous control. One's heart sinks to 
think of the amount of injury done to humanity by such irresponsible yet well- 
meaning religious fanatics. They little know that the minds which attain to 
sudden spiritual upheaval under their suggestions, with music and prayers, are 
simply making themselves passive, morbid, and powerless, and opening 
themselves to any other suggestion, be it ever so evil. Little do these ignorant, 
deluded persons dream that whilst they are congratulating themselves upon 
their miraculous power to transform human hearts, which power they think was 
poured upon them by some Being above the clouds, they are sowing the seeds 
of future decay, of crime, of lunacy, and of death. Therefore, beware of 
everything that takes away your freedom. Know that it is dangerous, and avoid 
it by all the means in your power. 

He who has succeeded in attaching or detaching his mind to or from the centres 
at will has succeeded in Pratyahara, which means, "gathering towards," 
checking the outgoing powers of the mind, freeing it from the thraldom of the 
senses. When we can do this, we shall really possess character; then alone we 
shall have taken a long step towards freedom; before that we are mere 
machines. 

How hard it is to control the mind! Well has it been compared to the maddened 
monkey. There was a monkey, restless by his own nature, as all monkeys are. 
As if that were not enough some one made him drink freely of wine, so that he 
became still more restless. Then a scorpion stung him. When a man is stung by 
a scorpion, he jumps about for a whole day; so the poor monkey found his 
condition worse than ever. To complete his misery a demon entered into him. 
What language can describe the uncontrollable restlessness of that monkey? 
The human mind is like that monkey, incessantly active by its own nature; then 
it becomes drunk with the wine of desire, thus increasing its turbulence. After 
desire takes possession comes the sting of the scorpion of jealousy at the 
success of others, and last of all the demon of pride enters the mind, making it 
think itself of all importance. How hard to control such a mind! 

The first lesson, then, is to sit for some time and let the mind run on. The mind 
is bubbling up all the time. It is like that monkey jumping about. Let the 


monkey jump as much as he can; you simply wait and watch. Knowledge is 
power, says the proverb, and that is true. Until you know what the mind is 
doing you cannot control it. Give it the rein; many hideous thoughts may come 
into it; you will be astonished that it was possible for you to think such 
thoughts. But you will find that each day the mind's vagaries are becoming less 
and less violent, that each day it is becoming calmer. In the first few months 
you will find that the mind will have a great many thoughts, later you will find 
that they have somewhat decreased, and in a few more months they will be 
fewer and fewer, until at last the mind will be under perfect control; but we 
must patiently practice every day. As soon as the steam is turned on, the engine 
must run; as soon as things are before us we must perceive; so a man, to prove 
that he is not a machine, must demonstrate that he is under the control of 
nothing. This controlling of the mind, and not allowing it to join itself to the 
centres, is Pratyahara. How is this practiced? It is a tremendous work, not to be 
done in a day. Only after a patient, continuous struggle for years can we 
succeed. 

After you have practiced Pratyahara for a time, take the next seep, the Dharana, 
holding the mind to certain points. What is meant by holding the mind to 
certain points? Forcing the mind to feel certain parts of the body to the 
exclusion of others. For instance, try to feel only the hand, to the exclusion of 
other parts of the body. When the Chitta, or mind-stuff, is confined and limited 
to a certain place it is Dharana. This Dharana is of various sorts, and along with 
it, it is better to have a little play of the imagination. For instance, the mind 
should be made to think of one point in the heart. That is very difficult; an 
easier way is to imagine a lotus there. That lotus is full of light, effulgent light. 
Put the mind there. Or think of the lotus in the brain as full of light, or of the 
different centres in the Sushumna mentioned before. 

The Yogi must always practice. He should try to live alone; the companionship 
of different sorts of people distracts the mind; he should not speak much, 
because to speak distracts the mind; not work much, because too much work 
distracts the mind; the mind cannot be controlled after a whole day's hard work. 
One observing the above rules becomes a Yogi. Such is the power of Yoga that 
even the least of it will bring a great amount of benefit. It will not hurt anyone, 
but will benefit everyone. First of all, it will tone down nervous excitement. 


bring calmness, enable us to see things more clearly. The temperament will be 
better, and the health will be better. Sound health will be one of the first signs, 
and a beautiful voice. Defects in the voice will be changed. This will be among 
the first of the many effects that will come. Those who practise hard will get 
many other signs. Sometimes there will be sounds, as a peal of bells heard at a 
distance, commingling, and falling on the ear as one continuous sound. 
Sometimes things will be seen, little specks of light floating and becoming 
bigger and bigger; and when these things come, know that you are progressing 
fast. 

Those who want to be Yogis, and practice hard, must take care of their diet at 
first. But for those who want only a little practice for everyday business sort of 
life, let them not eat too much; otherwise they may eat whatever they please. 
For those who want to make rapid progress, and to practice hard, a strict diet is 
absolutely necessary. They will find it advantageous to live only on milk and 
cereals for some months. As the organisation becomes finer and finer, it will be 
found in the beginning that the least irregularity throws one out of balance. One 
bit of food more or less will disturb the whole system, until one gets perfect 
control, and then one will be able to eat whatever one likes. 

When one begins to concentrate, the dropping of a pin will seem like a 
thunderbolt going through the brain. As the organs get finer, the perceptions get 
finer. These are the stages through which we have to pass, and all those who 
persevere will succeed. Give up all argumentation and other distractions. Is 
there anything in dry intellectual jargon? It only throws the mind off its balance 
and disturbs it. Things of subtler planes have to be realised. Will talking do 
that? So give up all vain talk. Read only those books which have been written 
by persons who have had realisation. 

Be like the pearl oyster. There is a pretty Indian fable to the effect that if it 
rains when the star SvM is in the ascendant, and a drop of rain falls into an 
oyster, that drop becomes a pearl. The oysters know this, so they come to the 
surface when that star shines, and wait to catch the precious raindrop. When a 
drop falls into them, quickly the oysters close their shells and dive down to the 
bottom of the sea, there to patiently develop the drop into the pearl. We should 
be like that. First hear, then understand, and then, leaving all distractions, shut 


your minds to outside influences, and devote yourselves to developing the truth 
within you. There is the danger of frittering away your energies by taking up an 
idea only for its novelty, and then giving it up for another that is newer. Take 
one thing up and do it, and see the end of it, and before you have seen the end, 
do not give it up. He who can become mad with an idea, he alone sees light. 
Those that only take a nibble here and a nibble there will never attain anything. 
They may titillate their nerves for a moment, but there it will end. They will be 
slaves in the hands of nature, and will never get beyond the senses. 

Those who really want to be Yogis must give up, once for all, this nibbling at 
things. Take up one idea. Make that one idea your life — think of it, dream of 
it, live on that idea. Let the brain, muscles, nerves, every part of your body, be 
full of that idea, and just leave every other idea alone. This is the way to 
success, and this is the way great spiritual giants are produced. Others are mere 
talking machines. If we really want to be blessed, and make others blessed, we 
must go deeper. The first step is not to disturb the mind, not to associate with 
persons whose ideas are disturbing. All of you know that certain persons, 
certain places, certain foods, repel you. Avoid them; and those who want to go 
to the highest, must avoid all company, good or bad. Practise hard; whether you 
live or die does not matter. You have to plunge in and work, without thinking 
of the result. If you are brave enough, in six months you will be a perfect Yogi. 
But those who take up just a bit of it and a little of everything else make no 
progress. It is of no use simply to take a course of lessons. To those who are 
full of Tamas, ignorant and dull — those whose minds never get fixed on any 
idea, who only crave for something to amuse them — religion and philosophy 
are simply objects of entertainment. These are the unpersevering. They hear a 
talk, think it very nice, and then go home and forget all about it. To succeed, 
you must have tremendous perseverance, tremendous will. "I will drink the 
ocean," says the persevering soul, "at my will mountains will crumble up." 

Have that sort of energy, that sort of will, work hard, and you will reach the 
goal. 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VII 
DHYANA AND SAMADHI 

We have taken a cursory view of the different steps in Raj a-Yoga, except the 
finer ones, the training in concentration, which is the goal to which Raj a-Yoga 
will lead us. We see, as human beings, that all our knowledge which is called 
rational is referred to consciousness. My consciousness of this table, and of 
your presence, makes me know that the table and you are here. At the same 
time, there is a very great part of my existence of which I am not conscious. All 
the different organs inside the body, the different parts of the brain — nobody 
is conscious of these. 

When I eat food, I do it consciously; when I assimilate it, I do it unconsciously. 
When the food is manufactured into blood, it is done unconsciously. When out 
of the blood all the different parts of my body are strengthened, it is done 
unconsciously. And yet it is I who am doing all this; there cannot be twenty 
people in this one body. How do I know that I do it, and nobody else? It may be 
urged that my business is only in eating and assimilating the food, and that 
strengthening the body by the food is done for me by somebody else. That 
cannot be, because it can be demonstrated that almost every action of which we 
are now unconscious can be brought up to the plane of consciousness. The 
heart is beating apparently without our control. None of us here can control the 
heart; it goes on its own way. But by practice men can bring even the heart 
under control, until it will just beat at will, slowly, or quickly, or almost stop. 
Nearly every part of the body can be brought under control. What does this 
show? That the functions which are beneath consciousness are also performed 
by us, only we are doing it unconsciously. We have, then, two planes in which 
the human mind works. First is the conscious plane, in which all work is 
always accompanied with the feeling of egoism. Next comes the unconscious 
plane, where all work is unaccompanied by the feeling of egoism. That part of 
mind-work which is unaccompanied with the feeling of egoism is unconscious 
work, and that part which is accompanied with the feeling of egoism is 
conscious work. In the lower animals this unconscious work is called instinct. 







In higher animals, and in the highest of all animals, man, what is called 
conscious work prevails. 

But it does not end here. There is a still higher plane upon which the mind can 
work. It can go beyond consciousness. Just as unconscious work is beneath 
consciousness, so there is another work which is above consciousness, and 
which also is not accompanied with the feeling of egoism. The feeling of 
egoism is only on the middle plane. When the mind is above or below that line, 
there is no feeling of "I", and yet the mind works. When the mind goes beyond 
this line of self-consciousness, it is called SamMhi or superconsciousness. 

How, for instance, do we know that a man in Samadhi has not gone below 
consciousness, has not degenerated instead of going higher? In both cases the 
works are unaccompanied with egoism. The answer is, by the effects, by the 
results of the work, we know that which is below, and that which is above. 
When a man goes into deep sleep, he enters a plane beneath consciousness. He 
works the body all the time, he breathes, he moves the body, perhaps, in his 
sleep, without any accompanying feeling of ego; he is unconscious, and when 
he returns from his sleep, he is the same man who went into it. The sum total of 
the knowledge which he had before he went into the sleep remains the same; it 
does not increase at all. No enlightenment comes. But when a man goes into 
Samadhi, if he goes into it a fool, he comes out a sage. 


What makes the difference? From one state a man comes out the very same 
man that he went in, and from another state the man comes out enlightened, a 
sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character changed, his life changed, 
illumined. These are the two effects. Now the effects being different, the causes 
must be different. As this illumination with which a man comes back from 
Samadhi is much higher than can be got from unconsciousness, or much higher 
than can be got by reasoning in a conscious state, it must, therefore, be 
superconsciousness, and Samadhi is called the superconscious state. 

This, in short, is the idea of Samadhi. What is its application? The application 
is here. The field of reason, or of the conscious workings of the mind, is narrow 
and limited. There is a little circle within which human reason must move. It 
cannot go beyond. Every attempt to go beyond is impossible, yet it is beyond 


this circle of reason that there lies all that humanity holds most dear. All these 
questions, whether there is an immortal soul, whether there is a God, whether 
there is any supreme intelligence guiding this universe or not, are beyond the 
field of reason. Reason can never answer these questions. What does reason 
say? It says, "I am agnostic; I do not know either yea or nay." Yet these 
questions are so important to us. Without a proper answer to them, human life 
will be purposeless. All our ethical theories, all our moral attitudes, all that is 
good and great in human nature, have been moulded upon answers that have 
come from beyond the circle. It is very important, therefore, that we should 
have answers to these questions. If life is only a short play, if the universe is 
only a "fortuitous combination of atoms," then why should I do good to 
another? Why should there be mercy, justice, or fellow-feeling? The best thing 
for this world would be to make hay while the sun shines, each man for 
himself. If there is no hope, why should I love my brother, and not cut his 
throat? If there is nothing beyond, if there is no freedom, but only rigorous 
dead laws, I should only try to make myself happy here. You will find people 
saying nowadays that they have utilitarian grounds as the basis of morality. 
What is this basis? Procuring the greatest amount of happiness to the greatest 
number. Why should I do this? Why should I not produce the greatest 
unhappiness to the greatest number, if that serves purpose? How will 
utilitarians answer this question? How do you know what is right, or what is 
wrong? I am impelled by my desire for happiness, and I fulfil it, and it is in my 
nature; I know nothing beyond. I have these desires, and must fulfil them; why 
should you complain? Whence come all these truths about human life, about 
morality, about the immortal soul, about God, about love and sympathy, about 
being good, and, above all, about being unselfish? 

All ethics, all human action and all human thought, hang upon this one idea of 
unselfishness. The whole idea of human life can be put into that one word, 
unselfishness. Why should we be unselfish? Where is the necessity, the force, 
the power, of my being unselfish? You call yourself a rational man, a 
utilitarian; but if you do not show me a reason for utility, I say you are 
irrational. Show me the reason why I should not be selfish. To ask one to be 
unselfish may be good as poetry, but poetry is not reason. Show me a reason. 
Why shall I be unselfish, and why be good? Because Mr. and Mrs. So-and-so 
say so does not weigh with me. Where is the utility of my being unselfish? My 


utility is to be selfish if utility means the greatest amount of happiness. What is 
the answer? The utilitarian can never give it. The answer is that this world is 
only one drop in an infinite ocean, one link in an infinite chain. Where did 
those that preached unselfishness, and taught it to the human race, get this 
idea? We know it is not instinctive; the animals, which have instinct, do not 
know it. Neither is it reason; reason does not know anything about these ideas. 
Whence then did they come? 

We find, in studying history, one fact held in common by all the great teachers 
of religion the world ever had. They all claim to have got their truths from 
beyond, only many of them did not know where they got them from. For 
instance, one would say that an angel came down in the form of a human being, 
with wings, and said to him, "Hear, O man, this is the message." Another says 
that a Deva, a bright being, appeared to him. A third says he dreamed that his 
ancestor came and told him certain things. He did not know anything beyond 
that. But this is common that all claim that this knowledge has come to them 
from beyond, not through their reasoning power. What does the science of 
Yoga teach? It teaches that they were right in claiming that all this knowledge 
came to them from beyond reasoning, but that it came from within themselves. 

The Yogi teaches that the mind itself has a higher state of existence, beyond 
reason, a superconscious state, and when the mind gets to that higher state, then 
this knowledge, beyond reasoning, comes to man. Metaphysical and 
transcendental knowledge comes to that man. This state of going beyond 
reason, transcending ordinary human nature, may sometimes come by chance 
to a man who does not understand its science; he, as it were, stumbles upon it. 
When he stumbles upon it, he generally interprets it as coming from outside. So 
this explains why an inspiration, or transcendental knowledge, may be the same 
in different countries, but in one country it will seem to come through an angel, 
and in another through a Deva, and in a third through God. What does it mean? 
It means that the mind brought the knowledge by its own nature, and that the 
finding of the knowledge was interpreted according to the belief and education 
of the person through whom it came. The real fact is that these various men, as 
it were, stumbled upon this superconscious state. 

The Yogi says there is a great danger in stumbling upon this state. In a good 


many cases there is the danger of the brain being deranged, and, as a rule, you 
will find that all those men, however great they were, who had stumbled upon 
this superconscious state without understanding it, groped in the dark, and 
generally had, along with their knowledge, some quaint superstition. They 
opened themselves to hallucinations. Mohammed claimed that the Angel 
Gabriel came to him in a cave one day and took him on the heavenly horse, 
Harak, and he visited the heavens. But with all that, Mohammed spoke some 
wonderful truths. If you read the Koran, you find the most wonderful truths 
mixed with superstitions. How will you explain it? That man was inspired, no 
doubt, but that inspiration was, as it were, stumbled upon. He was not a trained 
Yogi, and did not know the reason of what he was doing. Think of the good 
Mohammed did to the world, and think of the great evil that has been done 
through his fanaticism! Think of the millions massacred through his teachings, 
mothers bereft of their children, children made orphans, whole countries 
destroyed, millions upon millions of people killed! 

So we see this danger by studying the lives of great teachers like Mohammed 
and others. Yet we find, at the same time, that they were all inspired. Whenever 
a prophet got into the superconscious state by heightening his emotional nature, 
he brought away from it not only some truths, but some fanaticism also, some 
superstition which injured the world as much as the greatness of the teaching 
helped. To get any reason out of the mass of incongruity we call human life, we 
have to transcend our reason, but we must do it scientifically, slowly, by 
regular practice, and we must cast off all superstition. We must take up the 
study of the superconscious state just as any other science. On reason we must 
have to lay our foundation, we must follow reason as far as it leads, and when 
reason fails, reason itself will show us the way to the highest plane. When you 
hear a man say, "I am inspired," and then talk irrationally, reject it. Why? 
Because these three states — instinct, reason, and superconsciousness, or the 
unconscious, conscious, and superconscious states — belong to one and the 
same mind. There are not three minds in one man, but one state of it develops 
into the others. Instinct develops into reason, and reason into the transcendental 
consciousness; therefore, not one of the states contradicts the others. Real 
inspiration never contradicts reason, but fulfils it. Just as you find the great 
prophets saying, "I come not to destroy but to fulfil," so inspiration always 
comes to fulfil reason, and is in harmony with it. 




All the different steps in Yoga are intended to bring us scientifically to the 
superconscious state, or Samadhi. Furthermore, this is a most vital point to 
understand, that inspiration is as much in every man's nature as it was in that of 
the ancient prophets. These prophets were not unique; they were men as you or 
L They were great Yogis. They had gained this superconsciousness, and you 
and I can get the same. They were not peculiar people. The very fact that one 
man ever reached that state, proves that it is possible for every man to do so. 
Not only is it possible, but every man must, eventually, get to that state, and 
that is religion. Experience is the only teacher we have. We may talk and 
reason all our lives, but we shall not understand a word of truth, until we 
experience it ourselves. You cannot hope to make a man a surgeon by simply 
giving him a few books. You cannot satisfy my curiosity to see a country by 
showing me a map; I must have actual experience. Maps can only create 
curiosity in us to get more perfect knowledge. Beyond that, they have no value 
whatever. Clinging to books only degenerates the human mind. Was there ever 
a more horrible blasphemy than the statement that all the knowledge of God is 
confined to this or that book? How dare men call God infinite, and yet try to 
compress Him within the covers of a little book! Millions of people have been 
killed because they did not believe what the books said, because they would not 
see all the knowledge of God within the covers of a book. Of course this killing 
and murdering has gone by, but the world is still tremendously bound up in a 
belief in books. 

In order to reach the superconscious state in a scientific manner it is necessary 
to pass through the various steps of Raj a-Yoga I have been teaching. After 
Pratyahara and Dharana, we come to Dhyana, meditation. When the mind has 
been trained to remain fixed on a certain internal or external location, there 
comes to it the power of flowing in an unbroken current, as it were, towards 
that point. This state is called Dhyana. When one has so intensified the power 
of Dhyana as to be able to reject the external part of perception and remain 
meditating only on the internal part, the meaning, that state is called Samadhi. 
The three — Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi — together, are called Samyama. 
That is, if the mind can first concentrate upon an object, and then is able to 
continue in that concentration for a length of time, and then, by continued 
concentration, to dwell only on the internal part of the perception of which the 



object was the effect, everything comes under the control of such a mind. 

This meditative state is the highest state of existence. So long as there is desire, 
no real happiness can come. It is only the contemplative, witness-like study of 
objects that brings to us real enjoyment and happiness. The animal has its 
happiness in the senses, the man in his intellect, and the god in spiritual 
contemplation. It is only to the soul that has attained to this contemplative state 
that the world really becomes beautiful. To him who desires nothing, and does 
not mix himself up with them, the manifold changes of nature are one 
panorama of beauty and sublimity. 

These ideas have to be understood in Dhyana, or meditation. We hear a sound. 
First, there is the external vibration; second, the nerve motion that carries it to 
the mind; third, the reaction from the mind, along with which flashes the 
knowledge of the object which was the external cause of these different 
changes from the ethereal vibrations to the mental reactions. These three are 
called in Yoga, Shabda (sound), Artha (meaning), and Jnana (knowledge). In 
the language of physics and physiology they are called the ethereal vibration, 
the motion in the nerve and brain, and the mental reaction. Now these, though 
distinct processes, have become mixed up in such a fashion as to become quite 
indistinct. In fact, we cannot now perceive any of these, we only perceive their 
combined effect, what we call the external object. Every act of perception 
includes these three, and there is no reason why we should not be able to 
distinguish them. 

When, by the previous preparations, it becomes strong and controlled, and has 
the power of finer perception, the mind should be employed in meditation. This 
meditation must begin with gross objects and slowly rise to finer and finer, 
until it becomes objectless. The mind should first be employed in perceiving 
the external causes of sensations, then the internal motions, and then its own 
reaction. When it has succeeded in perceiving the external causes of sensations 
by themselves, the mind will acquire the power of perceiving all fine material 
existences, all fine bodies and forms. When it can succeed in perceiving the 
motions inside by themselves, it will gain the control of all mental waves, hi 
itself or in others, even before they have translated themselves into physical 
energy; and when he will be able to perceive the mental reaction by itself, the 


Yogi will acquire the knowledge of everything, as every sensible object, and 
every thought is the result of this reaction. Then will he have seen the very 
foundations of his mind, and it will be under his perfect control. Different 
powers will come to the Yogi, and if he yields to the temptations of any one of 
these, the road to his further progress will be barred. Such is the evil of running 
after enjoyments. But if he is strong enough to reject even these miraculous 
powers, he will attain to the goal of Yoga, the complete suppression of the 
waves in the ocean of the mind. Then the glory of the soul, undisturbed by the 
distractions of the mind, or motions of the body, will shine in its full 
effulgence; and the Yogi will find himself as he is and as he always was, the 
essence of knowledge, the immortal, the all-pervading. 

Samadhi is the property of every human being — nay, every animal. From the 
lowest animal to the highest angel, some time or other, each one will have to 
come to that state, and then, and then alone, will real religion begin for him. 
Until then we only struggle towards that stage. There is no difference now 
between us and those who have no religion, because we have no experience. 
What is concentration good for, save to bring us to this experience? Each one 
of the steps to attain Samadhi has been reasoned out, properly adjusted, 
scientifically organised, and, when faithfully practiced, will surely lead us to 
the desired end. Then will all sorrows cease, all miseries vanish; the seeds for 
actions will be burnt, and the soul will be free for ever. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VIII 
RAJA-YOGA IN BRIEF 

The following is a summary of Raj a-Yoga freely translated from the Kurma- 
Purana. 

The fire of Yoga burns the cage of sin that is around a man. Knowledge 
becomes purified and Nirvana is directly obtained. From Yoga comes 
knowledge; knowledge again helps the Yogi. He who combines in himself both 
Yoga and knowledge, with him the Lord is pleased. Those that practice 
Mahayoga, either once a day, or twice a day, or thrice, or always, know them to 
be gods. Yoga is divided into two parts. One is called Abhava, and the other, 
Mahayoga. Where one's self is meditated upon as zero, and bereft of quality, 
that is called Abhava. That in which one sees the self as full of bliss and bereft 
of all impurities, and one with God, is called Mahayoga. The Yogi, by each 
one, realises his Self. The other Yogas that we read and hear of, do not deserve 
to be ranked with the excellent Mahayoga in which the Yogi finds himself and 
the whole universe as God. This is the highest of all Yogas. 

A. 

Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyahara, Dharana, Dhyana, and 
SamMhi are the steps in Raja-Yoga, of which non-injury, truthfulness, non¬ 
covetousness, chastity, not receiving anything from another are called Yama. 
This purifies the mind, the Chitta. Never producing pain by thought, word, and 
deed, in any living being, is what is called Ahimsa, non-injury. There is no 
virtue higher than non-injury. There is no happiness higher than what a man 
obtains by this attitude of non-offensiveness, to all creation. By truth we attain 
fruits of work. Through truth everything is attained. In truth everything is 
established. Relating facts as they are — this is truth. Not taking others' goods 
by stealth or by force, is called Asteya, non-covetousness. Chastity in thought, 
word, and deed, always, and in all conditions, is what is called Brahmacharya. 
Not receiving any present from anybody, even when one is suffering terribly, is 
what is called Aparigraha. The idea is, when a man receives a gift from 
another, his heart becomes impure, he becomes low, he loses his independence. 







he becomes bound and attached. 


The following are helps to success in Yoga and are called Niyama or regular 
habits and observances; Tapas, austerity; SvMhyaya, study; Santosha, 
contentment; Shaucha, purity; Ishvara-pranidhana, worshipping God. Fasting, 
or in other ways controlling the body, is called physical Tapas. Repeating the 
Vedas and other Mantras, by which the Sattva material in the body is purified, 
is called study, Svadhyaya. There are three sorts of repetitions of these 
Mantras. One is called the verbal, another semi-verbal, and the third mental. 
The verbal or audible is the lowest, and the inaudible is the highest of all. The 
repetition which is loud is the verbal; the next one is where only the lips move, 
but no sound is heard. The inaudible repetition of the Mantra, accompanied 
with the thinking of its meaning, is called the "mental repetition," and is the 
highest. The sages have said that there are two sorts of purification, external 
and internal. The purification of the body by water, earth, or other materials is 
the external purification, as bathing etc. Purification of the mind by truth, and 
by all the other virtues, is what is called internal purification. Both are 
necessary. It is not sufficient that a man should be internally pure and 
externally dirty. When both are not attainable the internal purity is the better, 
but no one will be a Yogi until he has both. Worship of God is by praise, by 
thought, by devotion. 

We have spoken about Yama and Niyama. The next is Asana (posture). The 
only thing to understand about it is leaving the body free, holding the chest, 
shoulders, and head straight. Then comes Pranayama. Prana means the vital 

yv _ 

forces in one's own body, Ayama means controlling them. There are three sorts 
of Pranayama, the very simple, the middle, and the very high. Pranayama is 
divided into three parts: filling, restraining, and emptying. When you begin 
with twelve seconds it is the lowest Pranayama; when you begin with twenty- 
four seconds it is the middle Pranayama; that Pranayama is the best which 
begins with thirty-six seconds. In the lowest kind of Pranayama there is 
perspiration, in the medium kind, quivering of the body, and in the highest 
Pranayama levitation of the body and influx of great bliss. There is a Mantra 
called the Gayatri. It is a very holy verse of the Vedas. "We meditate on the 
glory of that Being who has produced this universe; may He enlighten our 
minds." Om is joined to it at the beginning and the end. In one Pranayama 


repeat three Gayatris. In all books they speak of Pranayama being divided into 
Rechaka (rejecting or exhaling), Puraka (inhaling), and Kurnbhaka (restraining, 
stationary). The Indriyas, the organs of the senses, are acting outwards and 
coming in contact with external objects. Bringing them under the control of the 
will is what is called Pratyahara or gathering towards oneself. Fixing the mind 
on the lotus of the heart, or on the centre of the head, is what is called Dharana. 
Limited to one spot, making that spot the base, a particular kind of mental 
waves rises; these are not swallowed up by other kinds of waves, but by 
degrees become prominent, while all the others recede and finally disappear. 
Next the multiplicity of these waves gives place to unity and one wave only is 
left in the mind. This is Dhyana, meditation. When no basis is necessary, when 
the whole of the mind has become one wave, one-formedness, it is called 
Samadhi. Bereft of all help from places and centres, only the meaning of the 
thought is present. If the mind can be fixed on the centre for twelve seconds it 
will be a Dharana, twelve such Dharanas will be a Dhyana, and twelve such 
Dhyanas will be a Samadhi. 

Where there is fire, or in water or on ground which is strewn with dry leaves, 
where there are many ant-hills, where there are wild animals, or danger, where 
four streets meet, where there is too much noise, where there are many wicked 
persons. Yoga must not be practiced. This applies more particularly to India. 

Do not practice when the body feels very lazy or ill, or when the mind is very 
miserable and sorrowful. Go to a place which is well hidden, and where people 
do not come to disturb you. Do not choose dirty places. Rather choose beautiful 
scenery, or a room in your own house which is beautiful. When you practice, 
first salute all the ancient Yogis, and your own Guru, and God, and then begin. 

Dhyana is spoken of, and a few examples are given of what to meditate upon. 
Sit straight, and look at the tip of your nose. Later on we shall come to know 
how that concentrates the mind, how by controlling the two optic nerves one 
advances a long way towards the control of the arc of reaction, and so to the 
control of the will. Here are a few specimens of meditation. Imagine a lotus 
upon the top of the head, several inches up, with virtue as its centre, and 
knowledge as its stalk. The eight petals of the lotus are the eight powers of the 
Yogi. Inside, the stamens and pistils are renunciation. If the Yogi refuses the 
external powers he will come to salvation. So the eight petals of the lotus are 


the eight powers, but the internal stamens and pistils are extreme renunciation, 
the renunciation of all these powers. Inside of that lotus think of the Golden 
One, the Almighty, the Intangible, He whose name is Om, the Inexpressible, 
surrounded with effulgent light. Meditate on that. Another meditation is given. 
Think of a space in your heart, and in the midst of that space think that a flame 
is burning. Think of that flame as your own soul and inside the flame is another 
effulgent light, and that is the Soul of your soul, God. Meditate upon that in the 
heart. Chastity, non-injury, forgiving even the greatest enemy, truth, faith in the 
Lord, these are all different Vrittis. Be not afraid if you are not perfect in all of 
these; work, they will come. He who has given up all attachment, all fear, and 
all anger, he whose whole soul has gone unto the Lord, he who has taken 
refuge in the Lord, whose heart has become purified, with whatsoever desire he 
comes to the Lord, He will grant that to him. Therefore worship Him through 
knowledge, love, or renunciation. 

"He who hates none, who is the friend of all, who is merciful to all, who has 
nothing of his own, who is free from egoism, who is even-minded in pain and 
pleasure, who is forbearing, who is always satisfied, who works always in 
Yoga, whose self has become controlled, whose will is firm, whose mind and 
intellect are given up unto Me, such a one is My beloved Bhakta. From whom 
comes no disturbance, who cannot be disturbed by others, who is free from joy, 
anger, fear, and anxiety, such a one is My beloved. He who does not depend on 
anything, who is pure and active, who does not care whether good comes or 
evil, and never becomes miserable, who has given up all efforts for himself; 
who is the same in praise or in blame, with a silent, thoughtful mind, blessed 
with what little comes in his way, homeless, for the whole world is his home, 
and who is steady in his ideas, such a one is My beloved Bhakta." Such alone 
become Yogis. 


^ ^ ^ ^ 

There was a great god-sage called Narada. Just as there are sages among 
mankind, great Yogis, so there are great Yogis among the gods. Narada was a 
good Yogi, and very great. He travelled everywhere. One day he was passing 
through a forest, and saw a man who had been meditating until the white ants 
had built a huge mound round his body — so long had he been sitting in that 



position. He said to Narada, "Where are you going?" Narada replied, "I am 
going to heaven." "Then ask God when He will be merciful to me; when I shall 
attain freedom." Further on Narada saw another man. He was jumping about, 
singing, dancing, and said, "Oh, Narada, where are you going?" His voice and 
his gestures were wild. Narada said, "I am going to heaven." "Then, ask when I 
shall be free." Narada went on. In the course of time he came again by the same 
road, and there was the man who had been meditating with the ant-hill round 
him. He said, "Oh, Narada, did you ask the Lord about me?" "Oh, yes." "What 
did He say?" "The Lord told me that you would attain freedom in four more 
births." Then the man began to weep and wail, and said, "I have meditated until 
an ant-hill has grown around me, and I have four more births yet!" Narada went 
to the other man. "Did you ask my question?" "Oh, yes. Do you see this 
tamarind tree? I have to tell you that as many leaves as there are on that tree, so 
many times, you shall be born, and then you shall attain freedom." The man 
began to dance for joy, and said, "I shall have freedom after such a short time!" 
A voice came, "My child, you will have freedom this minute." That was the 
reward for his perseverance. He was ready to work through all those births, 
nothing discouraged him. But the first man felt that even four more births were 
too long. Only perseverance, like that of the man who was willing to wait aeons 
brings about the highest result. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
INTRODUCTION 

Before going into the Yoga aphorisms I shall try to discuss one great question, 
upon which rests the whole theory of religion for the Yogis. It seems the 
consensus of opinion of the great minds of the world, and it has been nearly 
demonstrated by researches into physical nature, that we are the outcome and 
manifestation of an absolute condition, back of our present relative condition, 
and are going forward, to return to that absolute. This being granted, the 
question is: Which is better, the absolute or this state? There are not wanting 
people who think that this manifested state is the highest state of man. Thinkers 
of great calibre are of the opinion that we are manifestations of undifferentiated 
being and the differentiated state is higher than the absolute. They imagine that 
in the absolute there cannot be any quality; that it must be insensate, dull, and 
lifeless; that only this life can be enjoyed, and, therefore, we must cling to it. 
First of all we want to inquire into other solutions of life. There was an old 
solution that man after death remained the same; that all his good sides, minus 
his evil sides, remained for ever. Logically stated, this means that man's goal is 
the world; this world carried a stage higher, and eliminated of its evils, is the 
state they call heaven. This theory, on the face of it, is absurd and puerile, 
because it cannot be. There cannot be good without evil, nor evil without good. 
To live in a world where it is all good and no evil is what Sanskrit logicians 
call a "dream in the air". Another theory in modern times has been presented by 
several schools, that man's destiny is to go on always improving, always 
struggling towards, but never reaching the goal. This statement, though 
apparently very nice, is also absurd, because there is no such thing as motion in 
a straight line. Every motion is in a circle. If you can take up a stone, and 
project it into space, and then live long enough, that stone, if it meets with no 
obstruction, will come back exactly to your hand. A straight line, infinitely 
projected must end in a circle. Therefore, this idea that the destiny of man is 
progressing ever forward and forward, and never stopping, is absurd. Although 
extraneous to the subject, I may remark that this idea explains the ethical theory 
that you must not hate, and must love. Because, just as in the case of electricity 






the modern theory is that the power leaves the dynamo and completes the circle 
back to the dynamo, so with hate and love; they must come back to the source. 
Therefore do not hate anybody, because that hatred which comes out from you, 
must, in the long run, come back to you. If you love, that love will come back 
to you, completing the circle. It is as certain as can be, that every bit of hatred 
that goes out of the heart of a man comes back to him in full force, nothing can 
stop it; similarly every impulse of love comes back to him. 

On other and practical grounds we see that the theory of eternal progression is 
untenable, for destruction is the goal of everything earthly. All our struggles 
and hopes and fears and joys, what will they lead to? We shall all end in death. 
Nothing is so certain as this. Where, then, is this motion in a straight line — 
this infinite progression? It is only going out to a distance, and coming back to 
the centre from which it started. See how, from nebulae, the sun, moon, and 
stars are produced; then they dissolve and go back to nebulae. The same is 
being done everywhere. The plant takes material from the earth, dissolves, and 
gives it back. Every form in this world is taken out of surrounding atoms and 
goes back to these atoms. It cannot be that the same law acts differently in 
different places. Law is uniform. Nothing is more certain than that. If this is the 
law of nature, it also applies to thought. Thought will dissolve and go back to 
its origin. Whether we will it or not, we shall have to return to our origin which 
is called God or Absolute. We all came from God, and we are all bound to go 
back to God. Call that by any name you like, God, Absolute, or Nature, the fact 
remains the same. "From whom all this universe comes out, in whom all that is 
born lives, and to whom all returns." This is one fact that is certain. Nature 
works on the same plan; what is being worked out in one sphere is repeated in 
millions of spheres. What you see with the planets, the same will it be with this 
earth, with men, and with all. The huge wave is a mighty compound of small 
waves, it may be of millions; the life of the whole world is a compound of 
millions of little lives, and the death of the whole world is the compound of the 
deaths of these millions of little beings. 

Now the question arises: Is going back to God the higher state, or not? The 
philosophers of the Yoga school emphatically answer that it is. They say that 
man's present state is a degeneration. There is not one religion on the face of 
the earth which says that man is an improvement. The idea is that his beginning 



is perfect and pure, that he degenerates until he cannot degenerate further, and 
that there must come a time when he shoots upward again to complete the 
circle. The circle must be described. However low he may go, he must 
ultimately take the upward bend and go back to the original source, which is 
God. Man comes from God in the beginning, in the middle he becomes man, 
and in the end he goes back to God. This is the method of putting it in the 
dualistic form. The monistic form is that man is God, and goes back to Him 
again If our present state is the higher one, then why is there so much horror 
and misery, and why is there an end to it? If this is the higher state, why does it 
end? That which corrupts and degenerates cannot be the highest state. Why 
should it be so diabolical, so unsatisfying? It is only excusable, inasmuch as 
through it we are taking a higher groove; we have to pass through it in order to 
become regenerate again. Put a seed into the ground and it disintegrates, 
dissolves after a time, and out of that dissolution comes the splendid tree. 

Every soul must disintegrate to become God. So it follows that the sooner we 
get out of this state we call "man" the better for us Is it by committing suicide 
that we get out of this state? Not at all. That will be making it worse. Torturing 
our. selves, or condemning the world, is not the way to get out. We have to 
pass through the Slough of Despond, and the sooner we are through, the better. 
It must always be remembered that man-state is not the highest state. 

The really difficult part to understand is that this state, the Absolute, which has 
been called the highest, is not, as some fear, that of the zoophyte or of the 
stone. According to them, there are only two states of existence, one of the 
stone, and the other of thought. What right have they to limit existence to these 
two? Is there not something infinitely superior to thought? The vibrations of 
light, when they are very low, we do not see; when they become a little more 
intense, they become light to us; when they become still more intense, we do 
not see them — it is dark to us. Is the darkness in the end the same darkness as 
in the beginning? Certainly not; they are different as the two poles. Is the 
thoughtlessness of the stone the same as the thoughtlessness of God? Certainly 
not. God does not think; He does not reason. Why should He? Is anything 
unknown to Him, that He should reason? The stone cannot reason; God does 
not. Such is the difference. These philosophers think it is awful if we go 
beyond thought; they find nothing beyond thought. 


There are much higher states of existence beyond reasoning. It is really beyond 
the intellect that the first state. Of religious life is to be found. When you step 
beyond thought and intellect and all reasoning, then you have made the first 
step towards God; and that is the beginning of life. What is commonly called 
life is but an embryo state. 

The next question will be: What proof is there that the state beyond thought and 
reasoning is the highest state? In the first place, all the great men of the world, 
much greater than those that only talk, men who moved the world, men who 
never thought of any selfish ends whatever, have declared that this life is but a 
little stage on the way towards Infinity which is beyond. In the second place, 
they not only say so, but show the way to every one, explain their methods, that 
all can follow in their steps. In the third place, there is no other way left. There 
is no other explanation. Taking for granted that there is no higher state, why are 
we going through this circle all the time; what reason can explain the world? 
The sensible world will be the limit to our knowledge if we cannot go farther, if 
we must not ask for anything more. This is what is called agnosticism. But 
what reason is there to believe in the testimony of the senses? I would call that 
man a true agnostic who would stand still in the street and die. If reason is all in 
all, it leaves us no place to stand on this side of nihilism. If a man is agnostic of 
everything but money, fame, and name, he is only a fraud. Kant has proved 
beyond all doubt that we cannot penetrate beyond the tremendous dead wall 
called reason. But that is the very first idea upon which all Indian thought takes 
its stand, and dares to seek, and succeeds in finding something higher than 
reason, where alone the explanation of the present state is to be found. This is 
the value of the study of something that will take us beyond the world. "Thou 
art our father, and wilt take us to the other shore of this ocean of ignorance." 
That is the science of religion, nothing else. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
CHAPTER I 

CONCENTRATION: ITS SPIRITUAL USES 

3iq ^I^imill?ll 


1. Now concentration is explained. 

II5II 

2. Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff (Chitta) from taking various forms (Vrittis). 

A good deal of explanation is necessary here. We have to understand what 
Chitta is, and what the Vrittis are. I have eyes. Eyes do not see. Take away the 
brain centre which is in the head, the eyes will still be there, the retinae 
complete, as also the pictures of objects on them, and yet the eyes will not see. 
So the eyes are only a secondary instrument, not the organ of vision. The organ 
of vision is in a nerve centre of the brain. The two eyes will not be sufficient. 
Sometimes a man is asleep with his eyes open. The light is there and the picture 
is there, but a third thing is necessary — the mind must be joined to the organ. 
The eye is the external instrument; wee need also the brain centre and the 
agency of the mind. Carriages roll down a street, and you do not hear them. 
Why? Because your mind has not attached itself to the organ of hearing. First, 
there is the instrument, then there is the organ, and third, the mind attached to 
these two. The mind takes the impression farther in, and presents it to the 
determinative faculty — Buddhi — which reacts. Along with this reaction 
flashes the idea of egoism. Then this mixture of action and reaction is presented 
to the Purusha, the real Soul, who perceives an object in this mixture. The 
organs (Indriyas), together with the mind (Manes), the determinative faculty 
(Buddhi), and egoism (Ahamkara), form the group called the Antahkarana (the 
internal instrument). They are but various processes in the mind-stuff, called 
Chitta. The waves of thought in the Chitta are called Vrittis (literally 
"whirlpool"). What is thought? Thought is a force, as is gravitation or 











repulsion. From the infinite storehouse of force in nature, the instrument called 
Chitta takes hold of some, absorbs it and sends it out as thought. Force is 
supplied to us through food, and out of that food the body obtains the power of 
motion etc. Others, the finer forces, it throws out in what we call thought. So 
we see that the mind is not intelligent; yet it appears to be intelligent. Why? 
Because the intelligent soul is behind it. You are the only sentient being; mind 
is only the instrument through which you catch the external world. Take this 
book; as a book it does not exist outside, what exists outside is unknown and 
unknowable. The unknowable furnishes the suggestion that gives a blow to the 
mind, and the mind gives out the reaction in the form of a book, in the same 
manner as when a stone is thrown into the water, the water is thrown against it 
in the form of waves. The real universe is the occasion of the reaction of the 
mind. A book form, or an elephant form, or a man form, is not outside; all that 
we know is our mental reaction from the outer suggestion. "Matter is the 
permanent possibility of sensations," said John Stuart Mill. It is only the 
suggestion that is outside. Take an oyster for example. You know how pearls 
are made. A parasite gets inside the shell and causes irritation, and the oyster 
throws a sort of enamelling round it, and this makes the pearl. The universe of 
experience is our own enamel, so to say, and the real universe is the parasite 
serving as nucleus. The ordinary man will never understand it, because when 
he tries to do so, he throws out an enamel, and sees only his own enamel. Now 
we understand what is meant by these Vrittis. The real man is behind the mind; 
the mind is the instrument his hands; it is his intelligence that is percolating 
through the mind. It is only when you stand behind the mind that it becomes 
intelligent. When man gives it up, it falls to pieces and is nothing. Thus you 
understand what is meant by Chitta. It is the mind-stuff, and Vrittis are the 
waves and ripples rising in it when external causes impinge on it. These Vrittis 
are our universe. 

The bottom of a lake we cannot see, because its surface is covered with ripples. 
It is only possible for us to catch a glimpse of the bottom, when the ripples 
have subsided, and the water is calm. If the water is muddy or is agitated all the 
time, the bottom will not be seen. If it is clear, and there are no waves, we shall 
see the bottom. The bottom of the lake is our own true Self; the lake is the 
Chitta and the waves the Vrittis. Again, the mind is in three states, one of 
which is darkness, called Tamas, found in brutes and idiots; it only acts to 


injure. No other idea comes into that state of mind. Then there is the active 
state of mind, Rajas, whose chief motives are power and enjoyment. "I will be 
powerful and rule others." Then there is the state called Sattva, serenity, 
calmness, in which the waves cease, and the water of the mind-lake becomes 
clear. It is not inactive, but rather intensely active. It is the greatest 
manifestation of power to be calm. It is easy to be active. Let the reins go, and 
the horses will run away with you. Anyone can do that, but he who can stop the 
plunging horses is the strong man. Which requires the greater strength, letting 
go or restraining? The calm man is not the man who is dull. You must not 
mistake Sattva for dullness or laziness. The calm man is the one who has 
control over the mind waves. Activity is the manifestation of inferior strength, 
calmness, of the superior. 

The Chitta is always trying to get back to its natural pure state, but the organs 
draw it out. To restrain it, to check this outward tendency, and to start it on the 
return journey to the essence of intelligence is the first step in Yoga, because 
only in this way can the Chitta get into its proper course. 

Although the Chitta is in every animal, from the lowest to the highest, it is only 
in the human form that we find it as the intellect. Until the mind-stuff can take 
the form of intellect it is not possible for it to return through all these steps, and 
liberate the soul. Immediate salvation is impossible for the cow or the dog, 
although they have mind, because their Chitta cannot as yet take that form 
which we call intellect. 

The Chitta manifests itself in the following forms — scattering, darkening, 
gathering, one-pointed, and concentrated. The scattering form is activity. Its 
tendency is to manifest in the form of pleasure or of pain. The darkening form 
is dullness which tends to injury. The commentator says, the third form is 
natural to the Devas, the angels, and the first and second to the demons. The 
gathering form is when it struggles to centre itself. The one-pointed form is 
when it tries to concentrate, and the concentrated form is what brings us to 
SamMhi. 


^ ll?ll 


3. At that time (the time of concentration) the seer (Purusha) rests in his own (unmodified) 


state. 


As soon as the waves have stopped, and the lake has become quiet, we see its 
bottom. So with the mind; when it is calm, we see what our own nature is; we 
do not mix ourselves but remain our own selves. 

iiBii 

4. At other times (other than that of concentration) the seer is identified with the modifications. 

For instance, someone blames me; this produces a modification, Vritti, in my 
mind, and I identify myself with it and the result is misery. 

II ^11 


5. There are five classes of modifications, (some) painful and (others) not painful. 


RTTM - llgll 


6. (These are) right knowledge, indiscrimination, verbal delusion, sleep, and memory. 

11^ 1 ij 


7. Direct perception, inference, and competent evidence are proofs. 

When two of our perceptions do not contradict each other, we call it proof. I 
hear something, and if it contradicts something already perceived, I begin to 
fight it out, and do not believe it. There are also three kinds of proof. 
Pratyaksha, direct perception; whatever we see and feel, is proof, if there has 
been nothing to delude the senses. I see the world; that is sufficient proof that it 
exists. Secondly, Anumana, inference; you see a sign, and from the sign you 

A. 

come to the thing signified. Thirdly, Aptavakya, the direct evidence of the 
Yogis, of those who have seen the truth. We are all of us struggling towards 
knowledge. But you and I have to struggle hard, and come to knowledge 
through a long tedious process of reasoning, but the Yogi, the pure one, has 
gone beyond all this. Before his mind, the past, the present, and the future are 
alike, one book for him to read; he does not require to go through the tedious 
processes for knowledge we have to; his words are proof, because he sees 















knowledge in himself. These, for instance, are the authors of the sacred 
scriptures; therefore the scriptures are proof. If any such persons are living now 
their words will be proof. Other philosophers go into long discussions about 
Aptavakya and they say, "What is the proof of their words?" The proof is their 
direct perception. Because whatever I see is proof, and whatever you see is 
proof, if it does not contradict any past knowledge. There is knowledge beyond 
the senses, and whenever it does not contradict reason and past human 
experience, that knowledge is proof. Any madman may come into this room 
and say he sees angels around him; that would not be proof. In the first place, it 
must be true knowledge, and secondly, it must not contradict past knowledge, 
and thirdly, it must depend upon the character of the man who gives it out. I 
hear it said that the character of the man is not of so much importance as what 
he may say; we must first hear what he says. This may be true in other things. 

A man may be wicked, and yet make an astronomical discovery, but in religion 
it is different, because no impure man will ever have the power to reach the 
truths of religion. Therefore we have first of all to see that the man who 
declares himself to be an Apta is a perfectly unselfish and holy person; 
secondly, that he has reached beyond the senses; and thirdly, that what he says 
does not contradict the past knowledge of humanity. Any new discovery of 
truth does not contradict the past truth, but fits into it. And fourthly, that truth 
must have a possibility of verification. If a man says, "I have seen a vision," 
and tells me that I have no right to see it, I believe him not. Everyone must 
have the power to see it for himself. No one who sells his knowledge is an 
Apta. All these conditions must be fulfilled; you must first see that the man is 
pure, and that he has no selfish motive; that he has no thirst for gain or fame. 
Secondly, he must show that he is superconscious. He must give us something 
that we cannot get from our senses, and which is for the benefit of the world. 
Thirdly, we must see that it does not contradict other truths; if it contradicts 
Other scientific truths reject it at once. Fourthly, the man should never be 
singular; he should only represent what all men can attain. The three sorts of 
proof are, then, direct sense-perception, inference, and the words of an Apta. I 
cannot translate this word into English. It is not the word "inspired", because 
inspiration is believed to come from outside, while this knowledge comes from 
the man himself. The literal meaning is "attained". 


ll^ll 




8. Indiscrimination is false knowledge not established in real nature. 


The next class of Vrittis that arises is mistaking one thing for another, as a 
piece of mother-of-pearl is taken for a piece of silver. 

1^^: II^11 

9. Verbal delusion follows from words having no (corresponding) reality. 

There is another class of Vrittis called Vikalpa. A word is uttered, and we do 
not wait to consider its meaning; we jump to a conclusion immediately. It is the 
sign of weakness of the Chitta. Now you can understand the theory of restraint. 
The weaker the man, the less he has of restraint. Examine yourselves always by 
that test. When you are going to be angry or miserable, reason it out how it is 
that some news that has come to you is throwing your mind into Vrittis. 

smi^ - ii?Qii 

10. Sleep is a Vritti which embraces the feeling of voidness. 

The next class of Vrittis is called sleep and dream. When we awake, we know 
that we have been sleeping; we can only have memory of perception. That 
which we do not perceive we never can have any memory of. Every reaction is 
a wave in the lake. Now, if, during sleep, the mind had no waves, it would have 
no perceptions, positive or negative, and, therefore, we would not remember 
them. The very reason of our remembering sleep is that during sleep there was 
a certain class of waves in the mind. Memory is another class of Vrittis which 
is called Smriti. 



11. Memory is when the (Vrittis of) perceived subjects do not slip away (and through 
impressions come back to consciousness). 


Memory can come from direct perception, false knowledge, verbal delusion, 
and sleep. Eor instance, you hear a word. That word is like a stone thrown into 
the lake of the Chitta; it causes a ripple, and that ripple rouses a series of 










ripples; this is memory. So in sleep. When the peculiar kind of ripple called 
sleep throws the Chitta into a ripple of memory, it is called a dream. Dream is 
another form of the ripple which in the waking state is called memory 




12. Their control is by practice and nonattachment. 

The mind, to have non-attachment, must be clear, good, and rational. Why 
should we practice? Because each action is like the pulsations quivering over 
the surface of the lake. The vibration dies out, and what is left? The Samskaras, 
the impressions. When a large number of these impressions are left on the 
mind, they coalesce and become a habit. It is said, "Habit is second nature", it 
is first nature also, and the whole nature of man; everything that we are is the 
result of habit. That gives us consolation, because, if it is only habit, we can 
make and unmake it at any time. The Samskaras are left by these vibrations 
passing out of our mind, each one of them leaving its result. Our character is 
the sum-total of these marks, and according as some particular wave prevails 
one takes that tone. If good prevails, one becomes good; if wildness, one 
becomes wicked; if joyfulness, one becomes happy. The only remedy for bad 
habits is counter habits; all the bad habits that have left their impressions are to 
be controlled by good habits. Go on doing good, thinking holy thoughts 
continuously; that is the only way to suppress base impressions. Never say any 
man is hopeless, because he only represents a character, a bundle of habits, 
which can be checked by new and better ones. Character is repeated habits, and 
repeated habits alone can reform 
character. 




13. Continuous struggle to keep them (the Vrittis) perfectly restrained is practice. 

What is practice? The attempt to restrain the mind in Chitta form to prevent its 
going out into waves. 


^ ^ wrsw 







14. It becomes firmly grounded by long constant efforts with great love (for the end to be 
attained). 

Restraint does not come in one day, but by long continued practice. 




15. That effect which comes to these who have given up their thirst after objects, either seen or 
heard, and which wills to control the objects, is non-attachment. 

The two motive powers of our actions are (1) what we see ourselves, (2) the 
experience of others. These two forces throw the mind, the lake, into various 
waves. Renunciation is the power of battling against these forces and holding 
the mind in check. Their renunciation is what see want. I am passing through a 
street, and a man comes and takes away my watch. That is my own experience. 
I see it myself, and it immediately throws my Chitta into a wave, taking the 
form of anger. Allow not that to come. If you cannot prevent that, you are 
nothing; if you can, you have Vairagya. Again, the experience of the worldly- 
minded teaches us that sense-enjoyments are the highest ideal. These are 
tremendous temptations. To deny them, and not allow the mind to come to a 
wave form with regard to them, is renunciation; to control the twofold motive 
powers arising from my own experience and from the experience of others, and 
thus prevent the Chitta from being governed by them, is Vairagya. These 
should be controlled by me, and not I by them. This sort of mental strength is 
called renunciation. Vairagya is the only way to freedom. 




16. That is extreme non-attachment which gives up even the qualities, and comes from the 
knowledge of (the real nature of) the Purusha. 

It is the highest manifestation of the power of Vairagya when it takes away 
even our attraction towards the qualities. We have first to understand what the 
Purusha, me Self, is and what the qualities are. According to Yoga philosophy, 
the whole of nature consists of three qualities or forces; one is called Tamas, 
another Rajas, and the third Sattva. These three qualities manifest themselves 
in the physical world as darkness or inactivity, attraction or repulsion, and 









equilibrium of the two. Everything that is in nature, all manifestations, are 
combinations and recombinations of these three forces. Nature has been 
divided into various categories by the Sankhyas; the Self of man is beyond all 
these, beyond nature. It is effulgent, pure, and perfect. Whatever of intelligence 
we see in nature is but the reflection of this Self upon nature. Nature itself is 
insentient. You must remember that the word nature also includes the mind; 
mind is in nature; thought is in nature; from thought, down to the grossest form 
of matter, everything is in nature, the manifestation of nature. This nature has 
covered the Self of man, and when nature takes away the covering, the self 
appears in Its own glory. The non-attachment, as described in aphorism 15 (as 
being control of objects or nature) is the greatest help towards manifesting the 
Self. The next aphorism defines Samadhi, perfect concentration which is the 
goal of the Yogi. 

17. The concentration called right knowledge is that which is followed by reasoning, 
discrimination bliss, unqualified egoism. 

Samadhi is divided into two varieties. One is called the Samprajnata, and the 
other the Asamprajnata. In the Samprajnata Samadhi come all the powers of 
controlling nature. It is of four varieties. The first variety is called the 
Savitarka, when the mind meditates upon an object again and again, by 
isolating it from other objects. There are two sorts of objects for meditation in 
the twenty-five categories of the Sankhyas, (1) the twenty-four insentient 
categories of Nature, and (2) the one sentient Purusha. This part of Yoga is 
based entirely on Sankhya philosophy, about which I have already told you. As 
you will remember, egoism and will and mind have a common basis, the Chitta 
or the mind-stuff, out of which they are all manufactured. The mind-stuff takes 
in the forces of nature, and projects them as thought. There must be something, 
again, where both force and matter are one. This is called Avyakta, the 
unmanifested state of nature before creation, and to which, after the end of a 
cycle, the whole of nature returns, to come out again after another period. 
Beyond that is the Purusha, the essence of intelligence. Knowledge is power, 
and as soon as we begin to know a thing, we get power over it; so also when 
the mind begins to meditate on the different elements, it gains power over 





them. That sort of meditation where the external gross elements are the objects 
is called Savitarka. Vitarka means question; Savitarka, with question, 
questioning the elements, as it were, that they may give their truths and their 
powers to the man who meditates upon them. There is no liberation in getting 
powers. It is a worldly search after enjoyments, and there is no enjoyment in 
this life; all search for enjoyment is vain; this is the old, old lesson which man 
finds so hard to learn. When he does learn it, he gets out of the universe and 
becomes free. The possession of what are called occult powers is only 
intensifying the world, and in the end, intensifying suffering. Though as a 
scientist Patanjali is bound to point out the possibilities of this science, he never 
misses an opportunity to warn us against these powers. 

Again, in the very same meditation, when one struggles to take the elements 
out of time and space, and think of them as they are, it is called Nirvitarka, 
without question. When the meditation goes a step higher, and takes the 
Tanmatras as its object, and thinks of them as in time and space, it is called 
Savichara, with discrimination; and when in the same meditation one 
eliminates time and space, and thinks of the fine elements as they are, it is 
called Nirvichara, without discrimination. The next step is when the elements 
are given up, both gross and fine, and the object of meditation is the interior 
organ, the thinking organ. When the thinking organ is thought of as bereft of 
the qualities of activity and dullness, it is then called Sananda, the blissful 
Samadhi. When the mind itself is the object of meditation, when meditation 
becomes very ripe and concentrated, when all ideas of the gross and fine 
materials are given up, when the Sattva state only of the Ego remains, but 
differentiated from all other objects, it is called Sasmita Samadhi. The man 
who has attained to this has attained to what is called in the Vedas "bereft of 
body". He can think of himself as without his gross body; but he will have to 
think of himself as with a fine body. Those that in this state get merged in 
nature without attaining the goal are called Prakritilayas, but those who do not 
stop even there reach the goal, which is freedom. 

18. There is another Samadhi which is attained by the constant practice of cessation of all 
mental activity, in which the Chitta retains only the unmanifested impressions. 





This is the perfect superconscious Asamprajnata Samadhi, the state which 
gives us freedom. The first state does not give us freedom, does not liberate the 
soul. A man may attain to all powers, and yet fall again. There is no safeguard 
until the soul goes beyond nature. It is very difficult to do so, although the 
method seems easy. The method is to meditate on the mind itself, and 
whenever thought comes, to strike it down, allowing no thought to come into 
the mind, thus making it an entire vacuum. When we can really do this, that 
very moment we shall attain liberation. When persons without training and 
preparation try to make their minds vacant, they are likely to succeed only in 
covering themselves with Tamas, the material of ignorance, which makes the 
mind dull and stupid, and leads them to think that they are making a vacuum of 
the mind. To be able to really do that is to manifest the greatest strength, the 
highest control. When this state, Asamprajnata, superconsciousness, is reached, 
the Samadhi becomes seedless. What is meant by that? In a concentration 
where there is consciousness, where the mind succeeds only in quelling the 
waves in the Chitta and holding them down, the waves remain in the form of 
tendencies. These tendencies (or seeds) become waves again, when the time 
comes. But when you have destroyed all these tendencies, almost destroyed the 
mind, then the Samadhi becomes seedless; there are no more seeds in the mind 
out of which to manufacture again and again this plant of life, this ceaseless 
round of birth and death. 

You may ask, what state would that be in which there is no mind, there is no 
knowledge? What we call knowledge is a lower state than the one beyond 
knowledge. You must always bear in mind that the extremes look very much 
alike. If a very low vibration of ether is taken as darkness, an intermediate state 
as light, very high vibration will be darkness again. Similarly, ignorance is the 
lowest state, knowledge is the middle state, and beyond knowledge is the 
highest state, the two extremes of which seem the same. Knowledge itself is a 
manufactured something, a combination; it is not reality. 

What is the result of constant practice of this higher concentration? All old 
tendencies of restlessness and dullness will be destroyed, as well as the 
tendencies of goodness too. The case is similar to that of the chemicals used to 
take the dirt and alloy off gold. When the ore is smelted down, the dross is 
burnt along with the chemicals. So this constant controlling power will stop the 


previous bad tendencies, and eventually, the good ones also. Those good and 
evil tendencies will suppress each other, leaving alone the Soul, in its own 
splendour untrammelled by either good or bad, the omnipresent, omnipotent, 
and omniscient. Then the man will know that he had neither birth nor death, 
nor need for heaven or earth. He will know that he neither came nor went, it 
was nature which was moving, and that movement was reflected upon the soul. 
The form of the light reflected by the glass upon the wall moves, and the wall 
foolishly thinks it is moving. So with all of us; it is the Chitta constantly 
moving making itself into various forms, and we think that we are these various 
forms. All these delusions will vanish. When that free Soul will command — 
not pray or beg, but command — then whatever It desires will be immediately 
fulfilled; whatever It wants It will be able to do. According to the Sankhya 
philosophy, there is no God. It says that there can be no God of this universe, 
because if there were one. He must be a soul, and a soul must be either bound 
or free. How can the soul that is bound by nature, or controlled by nature, 
create? It is itself a slave. On the other hand, why should the Soul that is free 
create and manipulate all these things? It has no desires, so it cannot have any 
need to create. Secondly, it says the theory of God is an unnecessary one; 
nature explains all. What is the use of any God? But Kapila teaches that there 
are many souls, who, though nearly attaining perfection, fall short because they 
cannot perfectly renounce all powers. Their minds for a time merge in nature, 
to re-emerge as its masters. Such gods there are. We shall all become such 
gods, and, according to the Sankhyas, the God spoken of in the Vedas really 
means one of these free souls. Beyond them there is not an eternally free and 
blessed Creator of the universe. On the other hand, the Yogis say, "Not so, 
there is a God; there is one Soul separate from all other souls, and He is the 
eternal Master of all creation, the ever free, the Teacher of all teachers." The 
Yogis admit that those whom the Sankhyas call "the merged in nature" also 
exist. They are Yogis who have fallen short of perfection, and though, for a tin 
e, debarred from attaining the goal, remain as rulers of parts of the universe. 




19. (This Samadhi when not followed by extreme non-attachment) becomes the cause of the re¬ 
manifestation of the gods and of those that become merged in nature. 










The gods in the Indian systems of philosophy represent certain high offices 
which are filled successively by various souls. But none of them is perfect. 


20. To others (this Samadhi) comes through faith, energy, memory, concentration, and 
discrimination of the real. 

These are they who do not want the position of gods or even that of rulers of 

cycles. They attain to liberation. 

energetic. 

\m\ 

21. Success is speedy for the extremely energetic. 

II5511 

22. The success of Yogis differs according as the means they adopt are mild, medium, or 
intense. 

II5?II 

23. Or by devotion to Ishvara. 

115^11 

24. Ishvara (the Supreme Ruler) is a special Purusha, untouched by misery, actions, their 
results, and desires. 

We must again remember that the Patanjala Yoga philosophy is based upon the 
Sankhya philosophy; only in the latter there is no place for God, while with the 
Yogis God has a place. The Yogis, however, do not mention many ideas about 
God, such as creating. God as the Creator of the universe is not meant by the 
Ishvara of the Yogis. According to the Vedas, Ishvara is the Creator of the 
universe; because it is harmonious, it must be the manifestation of one will. 

The Yogis want to establish a God, but they arrive at Him in a peculiar fashion 
of their own. They say: 














25. In Him becomes infinite that all-knowingness which in others is (only) a germ. 

The mind must always travel between two extremes. You can think of limited 
space, but that very idea gives you also unlimited space. Close your eyes and 
think of a little space; at the same time that you perceive the little circle, you 
have a circle round it of unlimited dimensions. It is the same with time. Try to 
think of a second; you will have, with the same act of perception, to think of 
time which is unlimited. So with knowledge. Knowledge is only a germ in 
man, but you will have to think of infinite knowledge around it, so that the very 
constitution of our mind shows us that there is unlimited knowledge, and the 
Yogis call that unlimited knowledge God. 




26. He is the Teacher of even the ancient teachers, being not limited by time. 

It is true that all knowledge is within ourselves, but this has to be called forth 
by another knowledge. Although the capacity to know is inside us, it must be 
called out, and that calling out of knowledge call only be done, a Yogi 
maintains, through another knowledge. Dead, insentient matter never calls out 
knowledge, it is the action of knowledge that brings out knowledge. Knowing 
beings must be with us to call forth what is in us, so these teachers were always 
necessary. The world was never without them, and no knowledge can come 
without them. God is the Teacher of all teachers, because these teachers, 
however great they may have been — gods or angels — were all bound and 
limited by time, while God is not. There are two peculiar deductions of the 
Yogis. The first is that in thinking of the limited, the mind must think of the 
unlimited; and that if one part of that perception is true, so also must the other 
be, for the reason that their value as perceptions of the mind is equal. The very 
fact that man has a little knowledge shows that God has unlimited knowledge. 
If I am to take one, why not the other? Reason forces me to take both or reject 
both. If I believe that there is a man with a little knowledge, I must also admit 
that there is someone behind him with unlimited knowledge. The second 
deduction is that no knowledge can come without a teacher. It is true, as the 
modern philosophers say, that there is something in man which evolves out of 











him; all knowledge is in man, but certain environments are necessary to call it 
out. We cannot find any knowledge without teachers. If there are men teachers, 
god teachers, or angel teachers, they are all limited; who was the teacher before 
them? We are forced to admit, as a last conclusion, one teacher who is not 
limited by time; and that One Teacher of infinite knowledge, without beginning 
or end, is called God. 


nUR: li:j^ll 


27. His manifesting word is Om. 

Every idea that you have in the mind has a counterpart in a word; the word and 
the thought are inseparable. The external part of one and the same thing is what 
we call word, and the internal part is what we call thought. No man can, by 
analysis, separate thought from word. The idea that language was created by 
men — certain men sitting together and deciding upon words, has been proved 
to be wrong. So long as man has existed there have beeni words and language. 
What is the connection between an idea and a word? Although we see that 
there must, always be a word with a thought, it is not necessary that the same 
thought requires the same word. The thought may be the same in twenty 
different countries, yet the language is different. We must have a word to 
express each thought, but these words need not necessarily have the same 
sound Sounds will vary in different nations. Our commentator says, "Although 
the relation between thought and word is perfectly natural, yet it does not mean 
a rigid connection between one sound and one idea." These sounds vary, yet 
the relation between the sounds and the thoughts is a natural one. The 
connection between thoughts and sounds is good only if there be a real 
connection between the thing signified and the symbol; until then that symbol 
will never come into general use. A symbol is the manifester of the thing 
signified, and if the thing signified has already an existence, and if, by 
experience, we know that the symbol has expressed that thing many times, then 
we are sure that there is a real relation between them. Even if the things are not 
present, there will be thousands who will know them by their symbols. There 
must be a natural connection between the symbol and the thing signified; then, 
when that symbol is pronounced, it recalls the thing signified. The 
commentator says the manifesting word of God is Om. Why does he emphasise 







this word? There are hundreds of words for God. One thought is connected 
with a thousand words; the idea "God" is connected with hundreds of words, 
and each one stands as a symbol for God. Very good. But there must be a 
generalization among all time words, some substratum, some common ground 
of all these symbols, and that which is the common symbol will be the best, 
and will really represent them all. In making a sound we use the larynx and the 
palate as a sounding board. Is there any material sound of which all other 
sounds must be manifestations, one which is the most natural sound? Om 
(Aum) is such a sound, the basis of all sounds. The first letter. A, is the root 
sound, the key, pronounced without touching any part of the tongue or palate; 
M represents the last sound in the series, being produced by the closed lips, and 
the U rolls from the very root to the end of the sounding board of the mouth. 
Thus, Om represents the whole phenomena of sound-producing. As such, it 
must be the natural symbol, the matrix of all the various sounds. It denotes the 
whole range and possibility of all the words that can be made. Apart from these 
speculations, we see that around this word Om are centred all the different 
religious ideas in India; all the various religious ideas of the Vedas have 
gathered themselves round this word Om. What has that to do with America 
and England, or any other country? Simply this, that the word has been retained 
at every stage of religious growth in India, and it has been manipulated to mean 
all the various ideas about God. Monists, dualists, mono-dualists, separatists, 
and even atheists took up this Om. Om has become the one symbol for the 
religious aspiration of the vast majority of human beings. Take, for instance, 
the English word God. It covers only a limited function, and if you go beyond 
it, you have to add adjectives, to make it Personal, or Impersonal, or Absolute 
God. So with the words for God in every other language; their signification is 
very small. This word Om, however, has around it all the various significances. 
As such it should be accepted by everyone. 

28. The repetition of this (Om) and meditating On its meaning (is the way). 

Why should there be repetition? We have not forgotten the theory of 
Samskaras, that the sum-total of impressions lives in the mind. They become 
more and more latent but remain there, and as soon as they get the right 




stimulus, they come out. Molecular vibration never ceases. When this universe 
is destroyed, all the massive vibrations disappear; the sun, moon, stars, and 
earth, melt down; but the vibrations remain in the atoms. Each atom performs 
the same function as the big worlds do. So even when the vibrations of the 
Chitta subside, its molecular vibrations go on, and when they get the impulse, 
come out again. We can now understand what is meant by repetition. It is the 
greatest stimulus that can be given to the spiritual Samskaras. "One moment of 
company with the holy makes a ship to cross this ocean of life." Such is the 
power of association. So this repetition of Om, and thinking of its meaning, is 
keeping good company in your own mind. Study, and then meditate on what 
you have studied. Thus light will come to you, the Self will become manifest. 

But one must think of Om, and of its meaning too. Avoid evil company, 
because the scars of old wounds are in you, and evil company is just the thing 
that is necessary to call them out. In the same way we are told that good 
company will call out the good impressions that are in us, but which have 
become latent. There is nothing holier in the world than to keep good company, 
because the good impressions will then tend to come to the surface. 




29. From that is gained (the knowledge of) introspection, and the destruction of obstacles. 

The first manifestation of the repetition and thinking of Om is that the 
introspective power will manifest more and more, all the mental and physical 
obstacles will begin to vanish. What are the obstacles to the Yogi? 




30. Disease, mental laziness, doubt, lack of enthusiasm, lethargy, clinging to sense-enjoyments, 
false perception, non-attaining concentration, and falling away from the state when obtained, 
are the obstructing distractions. 

Disease. This body is the boat which will carry us to the other shore of the 
ocean of life. It must be taken care of. Unhealthy persons cannot be Yogis. 
Mental laziness makes us lose all lively interest in the subject, without which 
there will neither be the will nor the energy to practice. Doubts will arise in the 






















mind about the truth of the science, however strong one's intellectual 
conviction may be, until certain peculiar psychic experiences come, as hearing 
or seeing at a distance, etc. These glimpses strengthen the mind and make the 
student persevere. Falling away ... when obtained. Some days or weeks when 
you are practicing, the mind will be calm and easily concentrated, and you will 
find yourself progressing fast. All of a sudden the progress will stop one day, 
and you will find yourself, as it were, stranded. Persevere. All progress 
proceeds by such rise and fall. 




31. Grief, mental distress, tremor of the body, irregular breathing, accompany non-retention of 
concentration. 

Concentration will bring perfect repose to mind and body every time it is 
practiced. When the practice has been misdirected, or not enough controlled, 
these disturbances come. Repetition of Om and self-surrender to the Lord will 
strengthen the mind, and bring fresh energy. The nervous shakings will come to 
almost everyone. Do not mind them at all, but keep on practicing. Practice will 
cure them and make the seat firm. 




32. To remedy this, the practice of one subject (should be made). 

Making the mind take the form of one object for some time will destroy these 
obstacles. This is general advice. In the following aphorisms it will be 
expanded and particularized. As one practice cannot suit everyone, various 
methods will be advanced, and everyone by actual experience will find out that 
which helps him most. 


f^WTTT ll??ll 


33. Friendship, mercy, glades, and indifference, being thought of in regard to subjects, happy, 
unhappy, good, and evil respectively, pacify the Chitta. 


We must have these four sorts of ideas. We must have friendship for all; we 



















must be merciful towards those that are in misery; when people are happy, we 
ought to be happy; and to the wicked we must be indifferent. So with all 
subjects that come before us. If the subject is a good one, we shall feel friendly 
towards it; if the subject of thought is one that is miserable, we must be 
merciful towards it. If it is good, we must be glad; if it is evil, we must be 
indifferent. These attitudes of the mind towards the different subjects that come 
before it will make the mind peaceful. Most of our difficulties in our daily lives 
come from being unable to hold our minds in this way. For instance, if a man 
does evil to us, instantly we want to react evil, and every reaction of evil shows 
that we are not able to hold the Chitta down; it comes out in waves towards the 
object, and we lose our power. Every reaction in the form of hatred or evil is so 
much loss to the mind; and every evil thought or deed of hatred, or any thought 
of reaction, if it is controlled, will be laid in our favour. It is not that we lose by 
thus restraining ourselves; we are gaining infinitely more than we suspect. Each 
time we suppress hatred, or a feeling of anger, it is so much good energy stored 
up in our favour; that piece of energy will he converted into the higher powers. 




34. By throwing out and restraining the Breath. 

The word used is Prana. Prana is not exactly breath. It is the name for the 
energy that is in the universe. Whatever you see in the universe, whatever 
moves or works, or has life, is a manifestation of this Prana. The sum-total of 
the energy displayed in the universe is called Prana. This Prana, before a cycle 
begins, remains in an almost motionless state; and when the cycle begins, this 
Prana begins to manifest itself. It is this Prana that is manifested as motion — 
as the nervous motion in human beings or animals; and the same Prana is 
manifesting as thought, and so on. The whole universe is a combination of 

A. 

Prana and Akasha; so is the human body. Out of Akasha you get the different 
materials that you feel and see, and out of Prana all the various forces. Now 
this throwing out and restraining the Prana is what is called Pranayama. 
Patanjali, the father of the Yoga philosophy, does not give very many particular 
directions about Pranayama, but later on other Yogis found out various things 
about this Pranayama, and made of it a great science. With Patanjali it is one of 
the many ways, but he does not lay much stress on it. He means that you 




simply throw the air out, and draw it in, and hold it for some time, that is all, 
and by that, the mind will become a little calmer. But, later on, you will find 
that out of this is evolved a particular science called Pranayama. We shall hear 
a little of what these later Yogis have to say. 

Some of this I have told you before, but a little repetition will serve to fix it in 
your minds. First, you must remember that this Prana is not the breath; but that 
which causes the motion of the breath, that which is the vitality of the breath, is 
the Prana. Again, the word Prana is used for all the senses; they are all called 
Pranas, the mind is called Prana; and so we see that Prana is force. And yet we 
cannot call it force, because force is only the manifestation of it. It is that which 
manifests itself as force and everything else in the way of motion. The Chitta, 
the mind-stuff, is the engine which draws in the Prana from the surroundings, 
and manufactures out of Prana the various vital forces — those that keep the 
body in preservation — and thought, will, and all other powers. By the 
abovementioned process of breathing we can control all the various motions in 
the body, and the various nerve currents that are running through the body. 

First we begin to recognise them, and then we slowly get control over them. 

Now, these later Yogis consider that there are three main currents of this Prana 
in the human body. One they call Ida, another Pingala, and the third Sushumna. 
Pingala, according to them, is on the right side of the spinal column, and the 
Ida on the left, and in the middle of the spinal column is the Sushumna, an 
empty channel. Ida and Pingala, according to them, are the currents working in 
every man, and through these currents, we are performing all the functions of 
life. Sushumna is present in all, as a possibility; but it works only in the Yogi. 
You must remember that Yoga changes the body. As you go on practising, 
your body changes; it is not the same body that you had before the practice. 
That is very rational, and can be explained, because every new thought that we 
have must make, as it were, a new channel through the brain, and that explains 
the tremendous conservatism of human nature. Human nature likes to run 
through the ruts that are already there, because it is easy. If we think, just for 
example's sake, that the mind is like a needle, and the brain substance a soft 
lump before it, then each thought that we have makes a street, as it were, in the 
brain, and this street would close up, but for the grey matter which comes and 
makes a lining to keep it separate. If there were no grey matter, there would be 



no memory, because memory means going over these old streets, retracing a 
thought as it were. Now perhaps you have marked that when one talks on 
subjects in which one takes a few ideas that are familiar to everyone, and 
combines and recombines them, it is easy to follow because these channels are 
present in everyone's brain, and it is only necessary to recur to them. But 
whenever a new subject comes, new channels have to be made, so it is not 
understood readily. And that is why the brain (it is the brain, and not the people 
themselves) refuses unconsciously to be acted upon by new ideas. It resists. 

The Prana is trying to make new channels, and the brain will not allow it. This 
is the secret of conservatism. The fewer channels there have been in the brain, 
and the less the needle of the Prana has made these passages, the more 
conservative will be the brain, the more it will struggle against new thoughts. 
The more thoughtful the man, the more complicated will be the streets in his 
brain, and the more easily he will take to new ideas, and understand them. So 
with every fresh idea, we make a new impression in the brain, cut new channels 
through the brain-stuff, and that is why we find that in the practice of Yoga (it 
being an entirely new set of thoughts and motives) there is so much physical 
resistance at first. That is why we find that the part of religion which deals with 
the world-side of nature is so widely accepted, while the other part, the 
philosophy, or the psychology, which clears with the inner nature of man, is so 
frequently neglected. 

We must remember the definition of this world of ours; it is only the Infinite 
Existence projected into the plane of consciousness. A little of the Infinite is 
projected into consciousness, and that we call our world. So there is an Infinite 
beyond; and religion has to deal with both — with the little lump we call our 
world, and with the Infinite beyond. Any religion which deals with one only of 
these two will be defective. It must deal with both. The part of religion which 
deals with the part of the Infinite which has come into the plane of 
consciousness, got itself caught, as it were, in the plane of consciousness, in the 
cage of time, space, and causation, is quite familiar to us, because we are in 
that already, and ideas about this world have been with us almost from time 
immemorial. The part of religion which deals with the Infinite beyond comes 
entirely new to us, and getting ideas about it produces new channels in the 
brain, disturbing the whole system, and that is why you find in the practice of 
Yoga ordinary people are at first turned out of their grooves. In order to lessen 



these disturbances as much as possible, all these methods are devised by 
Patanjali, that we may practice any one of them best suited to us. 

ii^yi 


35. Those forms of concentration that bring extraordinary sense-perceptions cause 
perseverance of the mind. 

This naturally comes with Dharana, concentration; the Yogis say, if the mind 
becomes concentrated on the tip of the nose, one begins to smell, after a few 
days, wonderful perfumes. If it becomes concentrated at the root of the tongue, 
one begins to hear sounds; if on the tip of the tongue, one begins to taste 
wonderful flavours; if on the middle of the tongue, one feels as if one were 
coming in contact with something. If one concentrates one's mind on the palate, 
one begins to see peculiar things. If a man whose mind is disturbed wants to 
take up some of these practices of Yoga, yet doubts the truth of them, he will 
have his doubts set at rest when, after a little practice, these things come to him, 
and he will persevere. 

36. Or (by the meditation on) the Effulgent Light, which is beyond all sorrow. 

This is another sort of concentration. Think of the lotus of the heart, with petals 
downwards, and running through it, the Sushumna; take in the breath, and 
while throwing the breath out imagine that the lotus is turned with the petals 
upwards, and inside that lotus is an effulgent light. Meditate on that. 




37. Or (by meditation on) the heart that has given up all attachment to sense-objects. 

Take some holy person, some great person whom you revere, some saint whom 
you know to be perfectly nonattached, and think of his heart. That heart has 
become non-attached, and meditate on that heart; it will calm the mind If you 
cannot do that there is the next way: 














38. Or by meditating on the knowledge that comes in sleep. 


Sometimes a man dreams that he has seen angels coming to him and talking to 
him, that he is in an ecstatic condition, that he has Beard music floating through 
the air. He is in a blissful condition in that dream, and when he wakes, it makes 
a deep impression on him. Think of that dream as real, and meditate upon it. If 
you cannot do that, meditate on any holy thing that pleases you. 




39. Or by the meditation on anything that appeals to one as good. 


This does not mean any wicked subject, but anything good that you like, any 
place that you like best, any scenery that you like best, any idea that you like 
best, anything that will concentrate the mind. 


wW II ^oii 


40. The Yogi's mind thus meditating, becomes unobstructed from the atomic to the infinite. 

The mind, by this practice, easily contemplates the most minute, as well as the 
biggest thing. Thus the mind waves become fainter. 


liy?ll 


41. The Yogi whose Vrittis have thus become powerless (controlled) obtains in the receiver, 
(the instrument of) receiving, and the received (the Self, the mind, and external objects), 
concentratedness arid sameness like the crystal (before different coloured objects). 

What results from this constant meditation? We must remember how in a 
previous aphorism Patanjali went into the various states of meditation, how the 
first would be the gross, the second the fine, and from them the advance was to 
still finer objects. The result of these meditations is that we can meditate as 
easily on the fine as on the gross objects. Here the Yogi sees the three things, 
the receiver, the received, and the receiving instrument, corresponding to the 
Soul, external objects, and the mind. There are three objects of meditation 




















given us. First, the gross things, as bodies, or material objects; second, fine 
things, as the mind, the Chitta; and third, the Purusha qualified, not the Purusha 
itself, but the Egoism. By practice, the Yogi gets established in all these 
meditations. Whenever he meditates he can keep out all other thoughts; he 
becomes identified with that on which he meditates. When he meditates, he is 
like a piece of crystal. Before flowers the crystal becomes almost identified 
with the flowers. If the flower is red, the crystal looks red, or if the flower is 
blue, the crystal looks blue. 




42. Sound, meaning, and resulting knowledge, being mixed up, is (called) Samadhi with 
question. 

Sound here means vibration, meaning the nerve currents which conduct it; and 
knowledge, reaction. All the various meditations we have had so far, Patanjali 
calls Savitarka (meditation with question). Later on he gives us higher and 
higher Dhyanas. In these that are called "with question," we keep the duality of 
subject and object, which results from the mixture of word, meaning, and 
knowledge. There is first the external vibration, the word. This, carried inward 
by the sense currents, is the meaning. After that there comes a reactionary wave 
in the Chitta, which is knowledge, but the mixture of these three makes up what 
we call knowledge. In all the meditations up to this we get this mixture as 
objects of meditation. The next Samadhi is higher. 

||^?|| 

43. The Samadhi called "without question" (comes) when the memory is purified, or devoid of 
qualities, expressing only the meaning (of the meditated object). 

It is by the practice of meditation of these three that we come to the state where 
these three do not mix. We can act rid of them. We will first try to understand 
what these three are. Here is the Chitta; you will always remember the simile of 
the mind-stuff to a lake, and the vibration, the word, the sound, like a pulsation 
coming over it. You have that calm lake in you, and I pronounce a word, 

"Cow". As soon as it enters through your ears there is a wave produced in your 
Chitta along with it. So that wave represents the idea of the cow, the form or 










the meaning as we call it. The apparent cow that you know is really the wave in 
the mind-stuff that comes as a reaction to the internal and external sound 
vibrations. With the sound, the wave dies away; it can never exist without a 
word. You may ask how it is, when we only think of the cow, and do not hear a 
sound. You make that sound yourself. You are saying "cow" faintly in your 
mind, and with that comes a wave. There cannot be any wave without this 
impulse of sound; and when it is not from outside, it is from inside, and when 
the sound dies, the wave dies. What remains? The result of the reaction, and 
that is knowledge. These three are so closely combined in our mind that we 
cannot separate them. When the sound comes, the senses vibrate, and the wave 
rises in reaction; they follow so closely upon one another that there is no 
discerning one from the other. When this meditation has been practiced for a 
long time, memory, the receptacle of all impressions, becomes purified, and we 
are able clearly to distinguish them from one another. This is called Nirvitarka, 
concentration without question. 




44. By this process (the concentrations) with discrimination and without discrimination, whose 
objects are finer, are (also) explained. 

A process similar to the preceding is applied again; only, the objects to be 
taken up in the former meditations are gross; in this they are fine. 




45. The finer objects end with the Pradhana. 

The gross objects are only the elements and everything manufactured out of 
them. The fine objects begin with the Tanmatras or fine particles. The organs, 
the mind, (The mind, or common sensorium, the aggregate of all the senses), egoism, the 
mind-stuff (the cause of all manifestation), the equilibrium state of Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas materials — called Pradhana (chief), Prakriti (nature), or 
Avyakta (unmanifest) — are all included within the category of fine objects, 
the Purusha (the Soul) alone being excepted. 


EH ll^ll 
















46. These concentrations are with seed. 


These do not destroy the seeds of past actions, and thus cannot give liberation, 
but what they bring to the Yogi is stated in the following aphorism. 

47. The concentration "without discrimination" being purified, the Chitta becomes firmly fixed. 




48. The knowledge in that is called "filled with Truth". 
The next aphorism will explain this. 




49. The knowledge that is gained from testimony and inference is about common objects. That 
from the Samadhi just Mentioned is of a much higher order, being able to penetrate where 
inference and testimony cannot go. 

The idea is that we have to get our knowledge of ordinary objects by direct 
perception, and by inference therefrom, and from testimony of people who are 
competent. By "people who are competent," the Yogis always mean the Rishis, 
or the Seers of the thoughts recorded in the scriptures — the Vedas. According 
to them, the only proof of the scriptures is that they were the testimony of 
competent persons, yet they say the scriptures cannot take us to realisation. We 
can read all the Vedas, and yet will not realise anything, but when we practice 
their teachings, then we attain to that state which realises what the scriptures 
say, which penetrates where neither reason nor perception nor inference can go, 
and where the testimony of others cannot avail. This is what is meant by the 
aphorism. 

Realisation is real religion, all the rest is only preparation — hearing lectures, 
or reading books, or reasoning is merely preparing the ground; it is not religion. 
Intellectual assent and intellectual dissent are not religion. The central idea of 
the Yogis is that just as we come in direct contact with objects of the senses, so 

















religion even can be directly perceived in a far more intense sense. The truths 
of religion, as God and Soul, cannot be perceived by the external senses. I 
cannot see God with my eyes, nor can I touch Him with my hands, and we also 
know that neither can we reason beyond the senses. Reason leaves us at a point 
quite indecisive; we may reason all our lives, as the world has been doing for 
thousands of years, and the result is that we find we are incompetent to prove 
or disprove the facts of religion. What we perceive directly we take as the 
basis, and upon that basis we reason. So it is obvious that reasoning has to run 
within these bounds of perception. It can never go beyond. The whole scope of 
realisation, therefore, is beyond sense-perception. The Yogis say that man can 
go beyond his direct sense-perception, and beyond his reason also. Man has in 
him the faculty, the incompetent to prove or disprove the facts power, of 
transcending his intellect even, a power which is in every being, every creature. 
By the practice of Yoga that power is aroused, and then man transcends the 
ordinary limits of reason, and directly perceives things which are beyond all 
reason. 




50. The resulting impression from this Samadhi obstructs all other impressions. 

We have seen in the foregoing aphorism that the only way of attaining to that 
superconsciousness is by concentration, and we have also seen that what hinder 
the mind from concentration are the past Samskaras, impressions. All of you 
have observed that, when you are trying to concentrate your mind, your 
thoughts wander. When you are trying to think of God, that is the very time 
these Samskaras appear. At other times they are not so active; but when you 
want them not, they are sure to be there, trying their best to crowd in your 
mind. Why should that be so? Why should they be much more potent at the 
time of concentration? It is because you are repressing them, and they react 
with all their force. At other times they do not react. How countless these old 
past impressions must be, all lodged somewhere in the Chitta, ready, waiting 
like tigers, to jump up! These have to be suppressedthat the one idea which we 
want may arise, to the exclusion of the others. Instead they are all struggling to 
come up at the same time. These are the various powers of the Samskaras in 
hindering concentration of the mind. So this Samadhi which has just been 








given is the best to be practiced, on account of its power of suppressing the 
Samskaras. The Samskara which will be raised by this sort of concentration 
will be so powerful that it will hinder the action of the others, and hold them in 
check. 

51. By the restraint of even this (impression, which obstructs all other impressions), all being 
restrained, comes the "seedless" Samadhi. 

You remember that our goal is to perceive the Soul itself. We cannot perceive 
the Soul, because it has got mingled up with nature, with the mind, with the 
body. The ignorant man thinks his body is the Soul. The learned man thinks his 
mind is the Soul. But both of them are mistaken. What makes the Soul get 
mingled up with all this? Different waves in the Chitta rise and cover the Soul; 
we only see a little reflection of the Soul through these waves; so, if the wave is 
one of anger, we see the Soul as angry; "I am angry," one says. If it is one of 
love, we see ourselves reflected in that wave, and say we are loving. If that 
wave is one of weakness, and the Soul is reflected in it, we think we are weak. 
These various ideas come from these impressions, these Samskaras covering 
the Soul. The real nature of the Soul is not perceived as long as there is one 
single wave in the lake of the Chitta; this real nature will never be perceived 
until all the waves have subsided. So, first, Patanjali teaches us the meaning of 
these waves; secondly, the best way to repress them; and thirdly, how to make 
one wave so strong as to suppress all other waves, fire eating fire as it were. 
When only one remains, it will be easy to suppress that also, and when that is 
gone, this Samadhi or concentration is called seedless. It leaves nothing, and 
the Soul is manifested just as It is, in Its own glory. Then alone we know that 
the Soul is not a compound; It is the only eternal simple in the universe, and as 
such. It cannot be born. It cannot die; It is immortal, indestructible, the ever- 
living essence of intelligence. 


» 







« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
CHAPTER H 

CONCENTRATION: ITS PRACTICE 


ER:- ll?ll 


1. Mortification, study, and surrendering fruits of work to God are called Kriya-yoga. 

Those Samadhis with which we ended our last chapter are very difficult to 
attain; so we must take them up slowly. The first step, the preliminary step, is 
called Kriya-yoga. Literally this means work, working towards Yoga. The 
organs are the horses, the mind is the rein, the intellect is the charioteer, the 
soul is the rider, and the body is the chariot. The master of the household, the 
King, the Self of man, is sitting in this chariot. If the horses are very strong and 
do not obey the rein, if the charioteer, the intellect, does not know how to 
control the horses, then the chariot will come to grief. But if the organs, the 
horses, are well controlled, and if the rein, the mind, is well held in the hands of 
the charioteer, the intellect, the chariot reaches the goal. What is meant, 
therefore, by this mortification? Holding the rein firmly while guiding the body 
and the organs; not letting them do anything they like, but keeping them both 
under proper control. Study. What is meant by study in this case? No study of 
novels or story books, but study of those works which teach the liberation of 
the Soul. Then again this study does not mean controversial studies at all. The 
Yogi is supposed to have finished his period of controversy. He has had enough 
of that, and has become satisfied. He only studies to intensify his convictions. 
Vada and Siddhanta — these are the two sorts of scriptural knowledge — Vada 
(the argumentative) and Siddhanta (the decisive). When a man is entirely 
ignorant he takes up the first of these, the argumentative fighting, and 
reasoning pro and con; and when he has finished that he takes up the 
Siddhanta, the decisive, arriving at a conclusion. Simply arriving at this 
conclusion will not do. It must be intensified. Books are infinite in number, and 
time is short; therefore the secret of knowledge is to take what is essential. 

Take that and by to live up to it. There is an old Indian legend that if you place 











a cup of milk and water before a Raja-Hamsa (swan), he will take all the milk 
and leave the water. In that way we should take what is of value in knowledge, 
and leave the dross. Intellectual gymnastics are necessary at first. We must not 
go blindly into anything. The Yogi has passed the argumentative state, and has 
come to a conclusion, which is, like the rocks, immovable. The only thing he 
now seeks to do is to intensify that conclusion. Do not argue, he says; if one 
forces arguments upon you, be silent. Do not answer any argument, but go 
away calmly, because arguments only disturb the mind. The only thing 
necessary is to train the intellect, what is the use of disturbing it for nothing? 
The intellect is but a weak instrument, and can give us only knowledge limited 
by the senses. The Yogi wants to go beyond the senses, therefore intellect is of 
no use to him. He is certain of this and, therefore, is silent, and does not argue. 
Every argument throws his mind out of balance, creates a disturbance in the 
Chitta, and a disturbance is a drawback. Argumentations and searchings of the 
reason are only by the way. There are much higher things beyond them. The 
whole of life is not for schoolboy fights and debating societies. "Surrendering 
the fruits of work to God" is to take to ourselves neither credit nor blame, but to 
give up both to the Lord and be at peace. 

11:311 

2. (It is for) the practice of Samadhi and minimizing the pain-bearing obstructions. 

Most of us make our minds like spoilt children, allowing them to do whatever 
they want. Therefore it is necessary that Kriya-yoga should be constantly 
practiced, in order to gain control of the mind, and bring it into subjection. The 
obstructions to Yoga arise from lack of control, and cause us pain. They can 
only be removed by denying the mind, and holding it in check, through the 
means of Kriya-yoga. 




3. The pain-bearing obstructions are — ignorance, egoism, attachment, aversion and clinging to 
life. 

These are the five pains, the fivefold tie that binds us down, of which ignorance 
is the cause and the other four its effects. It is the only cause of all our misery. 













What else can make us miserable? The nature of the Soul is eternal bliss. What 
can make it sorrowful except ignorance, hallucination, delusion? All pain of the 
Soul is simply delusion. 


ii^ii 


4. Ignorance is the productive field of all these that follow, whether they are dormant, 
attenuated, overpowered, or expanded. 

Ignorance is the cause of egoism, attachment, aversion, and clinging to life. 
These impressions exist in different states. They are sometimes dormant. You 
often hear the expression "innocent as a baby," yet in the baby may be the state 
of a demon or of a god, which will come out by degrees. In the Yogi, these 
impressions, the Samskaras left by past actions, are attenuated, that is, exist in a 
very fine state, and he can control them, and not allow them to become 
manifest. "Overpowered" means that sometimes one set of impressions is held 
down for a while by those that are stronger, but they come out when that 
repressing cause is removed. The last state is the "expanded," when the 
Samskaras, having helpful surroundings, attain to a great activity, either as 
good or evil. 

to ll^ll 

5. Ignorance is taking the non-eternal, the impure, the painful, and the non-Self for the eternal, 
the pure, the happy, and the Atman or Self (respectively). 

All the different sorts of impressions have one source, ignorance. We have first 
to learn what ignorance is. All of us think, "I am the body, and not the Self, the 
pure, the effulgent, the ever blissful," and that is ignorance. We think of man, 
and see man as body. This is the great delusion. 

lien 

6. Egoism is the identification of the seer with the instrument of seeing. 

The seer is really the Self, the pure one, the ever holy, the infinite, the 
immortal. This is the Self of man. And what are the instruments? The Chitta or 
mind-stuff, the Buddhi or determinative faculty, the Manas or mind, and the 









Indriyas or sense-organs. These are the instruments for him to see the external 
world, and the identification of the Self with the instruments is what is called 
the ignorance of egoism. We say, "I am the mind," "I am thought," "I am 
angry," or "I am happy". How can we be angry and how can we hate? We 
should identify ourselves with the Self that cannot change. If It is 
unchangeable, how can It be one moment happy, and one moment unhappy? It 
is formless, infinite, omnipresent. What can change It ? It is beyond all law. 
What can affect it? Nothing in the universe can produce an effect on It. Yet 
through ignorance, we identify ourselves with the mind-stuff, and think we feel 
pleasure or pain. 


II ^11 


7. Attachment is that which dwells on pleasure. 

We find pleasure in certain things, and the mind like a current flows towards 
them; and this following the pleasure centre, as it were, is what is called 
attachment. We are never attached where we do not find pleasure. We find 
pleasure in very queer things sometimes, but the principle remains: wherever 
we find pleasure, there we are attached. 

II ^11 

8. Aversion is that which dwells on pain. 

That which gives us pain we immediately seek to get away from. 

II^11 

9. Flowing through its own nature, and established even in the learned, is the clinging to life. 

This clinging to life you see manifested in every animal. Upon it many attempts 
have been made to build the theory of a future life, because men are so fond of 
life that they desire a future life also. Of course it goes without saying that this 
argument is without much value, but the most curious part of it is, that, in 
Western countries, the idea that this clinging to life indicates a possibility of 
future life applies only to men, but does not include animals In India this 









clinging to life has been one of the arguments to prove past experience and 
existence. For instance, if it be true that all our knowledge has come from 
experience, then it is sure that that which we never experienced we cannot 
imagine or understand. As soon a chickens are hatched they begin to pick up 
food. Many times it has been seen, where ducks have been hatched by hens, 
that, as soon as they came out of the eggs they flew to water, and the mother 
thought they would be drowned. If experience be the only source of 
knowledge, where did these chickens learn to pick up food, or the ducklings 
that the water was their natural element? If you say it is instinct, it means 
nothing — it is simply giving a word, but is no explanation. What is this 
instinct? We have many instincts in ourselves. For instance, most of you ladies 
play the piano, and remember, when you first learned, how carefully you had to 
put your fingers on the black and the white keys, one after the other, but now, 
after long years of practice, you can talk with your friends while your fingers 
play mechanically. It has become instinct. So with every work we do; by 
practice it becomes instinct, it becomes automatic; but so far as we know, all 
the cases which we now regard as automatic are degenerated reason. In the 
language of the Yogi, instinct is involved reason. Discrimination becomes 
involved, and gets to be automatic Samskaras. Therefore it is perfectly logical 
to think that all we call instinct in this world is simply involved reason. As 
reason cannot come without experience, all instinct is, therefore, the result of 
past experience. Chickens fear the hawk, and ducklings love the water; these 
are both the results of past experience. Then the question is whether that 
experience belongs to a particular soul, or to the body simply, whether this 
experience which comes to the duck is the duck's forefathers' experience, or the 
duck's own experience. Modern scientific men hold that it belongs to the body, 
but the Yogis hold that it is the experience of the mind, transmitted through the 
body. This is called the theory of reincarnation. 

We have seen that all our knowledge, whether we call it perception, or reason, 
or instinct, must come through that one channel called experience, and all that 
we now call instinct is the result of past experience, degenerated into instinct 
and that instinct regenerates into reason again. So on throughout the universe, 
and upon this has been built one of the chief arguments for reincarnation in 
India. The recurring experiences of various fears, in course of time, produce 
this clinging to life. That is why the child is instinctively afraid, because the 


past experience of pain is there in it. Even in the most learned men, who know 
that this body will go, and who say "never mind, we have had hundreds of 
bodies, the soul cannot die" — even in them, with all their intellectual 
convictions, we still find this clinging on to life. Why is this clinging to life? 
We have seen that it has become instinctive. In the psychological language of 
the Yogis it has become a Samskara. The Samskaras, fine and hidden, are 
sleeping in the Chitta. All this past experience of death, all that which we call 
instinct, is experience become subconscious. It lives in the Chitta, and is not 
inactive, but is working underneath. 

The Chitta-Vrittis, the mind-waves, which are gross, we can appreciate and 
feel; they can be more easily controlled, but what about the finer instincts? 

How can they be controlled? When I am angry, my whole mind becomes a 
huge wave of anger. I feel it, see it, handle it, can easily manipulate it, can fight 
with it; but I shall not succeed perfectly in the fight until I can get down below 
to its causes. A man says something very harsh to me, and I begin to feel that I 
am getting heated, and he goes on till I am perfectly angry and forget myself, 
identify myself with anger. When he first began to abuse me, I thought, "I am 
going to be angry". Anger was one thing, and I was another; but when I became 
angry, I was anger. These feelings have to be controlled in the germ, the root, 
in their fine forms, before even we have become conscious that they are acting 
on us. With the vast majority of mankind the fine states of these passions are 
not even known — the states in which they emerge from subconsciousness. 
When a bubble is rising from the bottom of the lake, we do not see it, nor even 
when it is nearly come to the surface; it is only when it bursts and makes a 
ripple that we know it is there. We shall only be successful in grappling with 
the waves when we can get hold of them in their fine causes, and until you can 
get hold of them, and subdue them before they become gross, there is no hope 
of conquering any passion perfectly. To control our passions we have to control 
them at their very roots; then alone shall we be able to burn out their very 
seeds. As fried seeds thrown into the ground will never come up, so these 
passions will never arise. 

m\ 


10. The fine Samskaras are to be conquered by resolving them into their causal state. 








Samskaras are the subtle impressions that manifest themselves into gross forms 
later on. How are these fine Samskaras to be controlled? By resolving the effect 
into its cause. When the Chitta, which is an effect, is resolved into its cause, 
Asmita or Egoism, then only, the fine impressions die along with it. Meditation 
cannot destroy these. 

\\m 

11. By meditation, their (gross) modifications are to be rejected. 

Meditation is one of the great means of controlling the rising of these waves. 

By meditation you can make the mind subdue these waves, and if you go on 
practicing meditation for days, and months, and years, until it has become a 
habit, until it will come in spite of yourself, anger and hatred will be controlled 
and checked. 

m\ 

12. The "receptacle of works" has its root in these pain-bearing obstructions, and their 
experience is in this visible life, or in the unseen life. 

By the "receptacle of works" is meant the sum-total of Samskaras. Whatever 
work we do, the mind is thrown into a wave, and after the work is finished, we 
think the wave is gone. No. It has only become fine, but it is still there. When 
we try to remember the work, it comes up again and becomes a wave. So it was 
there; if not, there would not have been memory. Thus every action, every 
thought, good or bad, just goes down and becomes fine, and is there stored up. 
Both happy and unhappy thoughts are called pain-bearing obstructions, because 
according to the Yogis, they, in the long run, bring pain. All happiness which 
comes from the senses will, eventually, bring pain. All enjoyment will make us 
thirst for more, and that brings pain as its result. There is no limit to man's 
desires; he goes on desiring, and when he comes to a point where desire cannot 
be fulfilled, the result is pain. Therefore the Yogis regard the sum-total of the 
impressions, good or evil, as pain-bearing obstructions; they obstruct the way 
to freedom of the Soul. 


It is the same with the Samskaras, the fine roots of all our works; they are the 






causes which will again bring effects, either in this life, or in the lives to come. 
In exceptional cases when these Samskaras are very strong, they bear fruit 
quickly; exceptional acts of wickedness, or of goodness, bring their fruits even 
in this life. The Yogis hold that men who are able to acquire a tremendous 
power of good Samskaras do not have to die, but, even in this life, can change 
their bodies into god-bodies. There are several such cases mentioned by me 
Yogis in their books. These men change the very material of their bodies; they 
re-arrange the molecules in such fashion that they have no more sickness, and 
what we call death does not come to them. Why should not this be? The 
physiological meaning of food is assimilation of energy from the sun. The 
energy has reached the plant, the plant is eaten by an animal, and the animal by 
man. The science of it is that we take so much energy from the sun, and make it 
part of ourselves. That being the case, why should there be only one way of 
assimilating energy? The plant's way is not the same as ours; the earth's process 
of assimilating energy differs from our own. But all assimilate energy in some 
form or other. The Yogis say that they are able to assimilate energy by the 
power of the mind alone, that they can draw in as much of it as they desire 
without recourse to the ordinary methods. As a spider makes its web out of its 
own substance, and becomes bound in it, and cannot go anywhere except along 
the lines of that web, so we have projected out of our own substance this 
network called the nerves, and we cannot work except through the channels of 
those nerves. The Yogi says we need not be bound by that. 

Similarly, we can send electricity to any part of the world, but we have to send 
it by means of wires. Nature can send a vast mass of electricity without any 
wires at all. Why cannot we do the same? We can send mental electricity. What 
we call mind is very much the same as electricity. It is clear that this nerve 
fluid has some amount of electricity, because it is polarised, and it answers all 
electrical directions. We can only send our electricity through these nerve 
channels. Why not send the mental electricity without this aid? The Yogis say 
it is perfectly possible and practicable, and that when you can do that, you will 
work all over the universe. You will be able to work with any body anywhere, 
without the help of the nervous system. When the soul is acting through these 
channels, we say a man is living, and when these cease to work, a man is said 
to be dead. But when a man is able to act either with or without these channels, 
birth and death will have no meaning for him. All the bodies in the universe are 


made up of Tanmatras, their difference lies in the arrangement of the latter. If 
you are the arranger, you can arrange a body in one way or another. Who 
makes up this body but you? Who eats the food? If another ate the food for 
you, you would not live long. Who makes the blood out of food? You, 
certainly. Who purifies the blood, and sends it through the veins? You. We are 
the masters of the body, and we live in it. Only we have lost the knowledge of 
how to rejuvenate it. We have become automatic, degenerate. We have 
forgotten the process of arranging its molecules. So, what we do automatically 
has to be done knowingly. We are the masters and we have to regulate that 
arrangement; and as soon as we can do that, we shall be able to rejuvenate just 
as we like, and then we shall have neither birth nor disease nor death. 




13. The root being there, the fruition comes (in the form of) species, life, and experience of 
pleasure and pain. 

The roots, the causes, the Samskaras being there, they manifest and form the 
effects. The cause dying down becomes the effect; the effect getting subtler 
becomes the cause of the next effect. A tree bears a seed, which becomes the 
cause of another tree, and so on. All our works now are the effects of past 
Samskaras; again, these works becoming Samskaras will be the causes of 
future actions, and thus we go on. So this aphorism says that the cause being 
there? the fruit must come, in the form of species of beings: one will be a man, 
another an angel, another an animal, another a demon. Then there are different 
effects of Karma in life. One man lives fifty years, another a hundred, another 
dies in two years, and never attains maturity; all these differences in life are 
regulated by past Karma. One man is born, as it were, for pleasure; if he buries 
himself in a forest, pleasure will follow him there. Another man, wherever he 
goes, is followed by pain; everything becomes painful for him. It is the result of 
their own past. According to the philosophy of the Yogis, all virtuous actions 
bring pleasure, and all vicious actions bring pain. Any man who does wicked 
deeds is sure to reap their fruit in the form of pain. 


14. They bear fruit as pleasure or pain, caused by virtue or vice. 










15. To the discriminating, all is, as it were, painful on account of everything bringing pain 
either as consequence, or as anticipation of loss of happiness, or as fresh craving arising from 
impressions of happiness, and also as counteraction of qualities. 

The Yogis say that the man who has discriminating powers, the man of good 
sense, sees through all that are called pleasure and pain, and knows that they 
come to all, and that one follows and melts into the other; he sees that men 
follow an ignis fatuus all their lives, and never succeed in fulfilling their 
desires. The great king Yudhishthira once said that the most wonderful thing in 
life is that every moment we see people dying around us, and yet we think we 
shall never die. Surrounded by fools on every side, we think we are the only 
exceptions, the only learned men. Surrounded by all sorts of experiences of 
fickleness, we think our love is the only lasting love. How can that be? Even 
love is selfish, and the Yogi says that in the end we shall find that even the love 
of husbands and wives, and children and friends, slowly decays. Decadence 
seizes everything in this life. It is only when everything, even love, fails, that, 
with a flash, man finds out how vain, how dream-like is this world. Then he 
catches a glimpse of Vairagya (renunciation), catches a glimpse of the Beyond. 
It is only by giving up this world that the other comes; never through holding 
on to this one. Never yet was there a great soul who had not to reject sense- 
pleasures and enjoyments to acquire his greatness. The cause of misery is the 
clash between the different forces of nature, one dragging one way, and another 
dragging another, rendering permanent happiness impossible. 


m\ 


16. The misery which is not yet come is to be avoided. 

Some Karma we have worked out already, some we are working out now in the 
present, and some are waiting to bear fruit in the future. The first kind is past 
and gone. The second we will have to work out, and it is only that which is 
waiting to bear fruit in the future that we can conquer and control, towards 
which end all our forces should be directed. This is what Patanjali means when 





he says that Samskaras are to be controlled by resolving them into their causal 
state ( II. 10) . 


17. The cause of that which is to be avoided is the junction of the seer and the seen. 

Who is the seer? The Self of man, the Purusha. What is the seen? The whole of 
nature beginning with the mind, down to gross matter. All pleasure and pain 
arise from the junction between this Purusha and the mind. The Purusha, you 
must remember, according to this philosophy, is pure; when joined to nature, it 
appears to feel pleasure or pain by reflection. 


18. The experienced is composed of elements and organs, is of the nature of illumination, 
action, and inertia, and is for the purpose of experience and release (of the experiencer). 

The experienced, that is nature, is composed of elements and organs — the 
elements, gross and fine, which compose the whole of nature, and the organs of 
the senses, mind, etc. — and is of the nature of illumination (Sattva), action 
(Rajas), and inertia (Tames). What is the purpose of the whole of nature? That 
the Purusha may gain experience. The Purusha has, as it were, forgotten its 
mighty, godly nature. There is a story that the king of the gods, Indra, once 
became a pig, wallowing in mire; he had a she-pig and a lot of baby pigs, and 
was very happy. Then some gods saw his plight, and came to him, and told 
him, "You are the king of the gods, you have all the gods under your command. 
Why are you here?" But Indra said, "Never mind; I am all right here; I do not 
care for heaven, while I have this sow and these little pigs." The poor gods 
were at their wits' end. After a time they decided to slay all the pigs one after 
another. When all were dead, Indra began to weep and mourn. Then the gods 
ripped his pig-body open and he came out of it, and began to laugh, when he 
realised what a hideous dream he had had — he, the king of the gods, to have 
become a pig, and to think that that pig-life was the only life! Not only so, but 
to have wanted the whole universe to come into the pig-life! The Purusha, 
when it identifies itself with nature, forgets that it is pure and infinite. The 
Purusha does not love, it is love itself. It does not exist, it is existence itself. 
















The Soul does not know, It is knowledge itself. It is a mistake to say the Soul 
loves, exists, or knows. Love, existence, and knowledge are not the qualities of 
the Purusha, but its essence. When they get reflected upon something, you may 
call them the qualities of that something. They are not the qualities but the 
essence of the Purusha, the great Atman, the Infinite Being, without birth or 
death, established in its own glory. It appears to have become so degenerate 
that if you approach to tell it, "You are not a pig," it begins to squeal and bite. 

Thus is it with us all in this Maya, this dream world, where it is all misery, 
weeping and crying, where a few golden balls are rolled, and the world 
scrambles after them. You were never bound by laws, nature never had a bond 
for you. That is what the Yogi tells you. Have patience to learn it. And the 
Yogi shows how, by junction with nature, and identifying itself with the mind 
and the world, the Purusha thinks itself miserable. Then the Yogi goes on to 
show you that the way out is through experience. You have to get all this 
experience, but finish it quickly. We have placed ourselves in this net, and will 
have to get out. We have got ourselves caught in the trap, and we will have to 
work out our freedom. So get this experience of husbands, and wives, and 
friends, and little loves; you will get through them safely if you never forget 
what you really are. Never forget this is only a momentary state, and that w e 
have to pass through it. Experience is the one great teacher — experience of 
pleasure and pain — but know it is only experience. It leads, step by step, to 
that state where all things become small, and the Purusha so great that the 
whole universe seems as a drop in the ocean and falls off by its own 
nothingness. We have to go through different experiences, but let us never 
forget the ideal. 




19. The states of the qualities are the defined, the undefined, the indicated only, and the 
signless. 

The system of Yoga is built entirely on the philosophy of the Sankhyas, as I 
told you before, and here again I shall remind you of the cosmology of the 
Sankhya philosophy. According to the Sankhyas, nature is both the material 
and the efficient cause of the universe. In nature there are three sorts of 
materials, the Sattva, the Rajas, and the Tamas. The Tamas material is all that 






is dark, all that is ignorant and heavy. The Rajas is activity. The Sattva is 
calmness, light. Nature, before creation, is called by them Avyakta, undefined, 
or indiscrete; that is, in which there is no distinction of form or name, a state in 
which these three materials are held in perfect balance. Then the balance is 
disturbed, the three materials begin to mingle in various fashions, and the result 
is the universe. In every man, also, these three materials exist. When the Sattva 
material prevails, knowledge comes; when Rajas, activity; and when Tamas, 
darkness, lassitude, idleness, and ignorance. According to the Sankhya theory, 
the highest manifestation of nature, consisting of the three materials, is what 
they call Mahat or intelligence, universal intelligence, of which each human 
intellect is a part. In the Sankhya psychology there is a sharp distinction 
between Manas, the mind function, and the function of the Buddhi, intellect. 
The mind function is simply to collect and carry impressions and present them 
to the Buddhi, the individual Mahat, which determines upon it. Out of Mahat 
comes egoism, out of which again come the fine materials. The fine materials 
combine and become the gross materials outside — the external universe. The 
claim of the Sankhya philosophy is that beginning with the intellect down to a 
block of stone, all is the product of one substance, different only as finer to 
grosser states of existence. The finer is the cause, and the grosser is the effect. 
According, to the Sankhya philosophy, beyond the whole of nature is the 
Purusha, which is not material at all. Purusha is not at all similar to anything 
else, either Buddhi, or mind, or the Tanmatras, or the gross materials. It is not 
akin to any one of these, it is entirely separate, entirely different in its nature, 
and from this they argue that the Purusha must be immortal, because it is not 
the result of combination. That which is not the result of combination cannot 
die. The Purushas or souls are infinite in number. 

Now we shall understand the aphorism that the states of the qualities are 
defined, undefined, indicated only, and signess. By the "defined" are meant the 
gross elements, which we can sense. By the "undefined" are meant the very 
fine materials, the Tanmatras, which cannot be sensed by ordinary men. If you 
practice Yoga, however, says Patanjali, after a while your perceptions will 
become so fine that you will actually see the Tanmatras. For instance, you have 
heard how every man has a certain light about him; every living being emits a 
certain light, and this, he says, can be seen by the Yogi. We do not all see it, 
but we all throw out these Tanmatras, just as a flower continuously sends out 


fine particles which enable us to smell it. Every day of our lives we throw out a 
mass of good or evil, and everywhere we go the atmosphere is full of these 
materials. That is how there came to the human mind, unconsciously, the idea 
of building temples and churches. Why should man build churches in which to 
worship God? Why not worship Him anywhere? Even if he did not know the 
reason, man found that the place where people worshipped God became full of 
good Tanmatras. Every day people go there, and the more they go the holier 
they get, and the holier that place becomes. If any man who has not much 
Sattva in him goes there, the place will influence him and arouse his Sattva 
quality. Here, therefore, is the significance of all temples and holy places, but 
you must remember that their holiness depends on holy people congregating 
there. The difficulty with man is that he forgets the original meaning, and puts 
the cart before the horse. It was men who made these places holy, and then the 
effect became the cause and made men holy. If the wicked only were to go 
there, it would become as bad as any other place. It is not the building, but the 
people that make a church, and that is what we always forget. That is why 
sages and holy persons, who have much of this Sattva quality, can send it out 
and exert a tremendous influence day and night on their surroundings. A man 
may become so pure that his purity will become tangible. Whosoever comes in 
contact with him becomes pure. 

Next "the indicated only" means the Buddhi, the intellect. "The indicated only" 
is the first manifestation of nature; from it all other manifestations proceed. The 
last is "the signless". There seems to be a great difference between modern 
science and all religions at this point. Every religion has the idea that the 
universe comes out of intelligence. The theory of God, taking it in its 
psychological significance, apart from all ideas of personality, is that 
intelligence is first in the order of creation, and that out of intelligence comes 
what we call gross matter. Modern philosophers say that intelligence is the last 
to come. They say that unintelligent things slowly evolve into animals, and 
from animals into men. They claim that instead of everything coming out of 
intelligence, intelligence itself is the last to come. Both the religious and the 
scientific statements, though seeming directly opposed to each other are true. 
Take an infinite series, A—B—A—B —A—B. etc. The question is — which is 
first, A or B? If you take the series as A—B. you will say that A is first, but if 
you take it as B—A, you will say that B is first. It depends upon the way we 








look at it. Intelligence undergoes modification and becomes the gross matter, 
this again merges into intelligence, and thus the process goes on. The 
Sankhyas, and other religionists, put intelligence first, and the series becomes 
intelligence, then matter. The scientific man puts his finger on matter, and says 
matter, then intelligence. They both indicate the same chain. Indian philosophy, 
however, goes beyond both intelligence and matter, and finds a Purusha, or 
Self, which is beyond intelligence, of which intelligence is but the borrowed 
light. 




20. The seer is intelligence only, and though pure, sees through the colouring of the intellect. 

This is, again, Sankhya philosophy. We have seen from the same philosophy 
that from the lowest form up to intelligence all is nature; beyond nature are 
Purushas (souls), which have no qualities. Then how does the soul appear to be 
happy or unhappy? By reflection. If a red flower is put near a piece of pure 
crystal, the crystal appears to be red, similarly the appearances of happiness or 
unhappiness of the soul are but reflections. The soul itself has no colouring. 

The soul is separate from nature. Nature is one thing, soul another, eternally 
separate. The Sankhyas say that intelligence is a compound, that it grows and 
wanes, that it changes, just as the body changes, and that its nature is nearly the 
same as that of the body. As a finger-nail is to the body, so is body to 
intelligence. The nail is a part of the body, but it can be pared off hundreds of 
times, and the body will still last. Similarly, the intelligence lasts aeons, while 
this body can be "pared off," thrown off. Yet intelligence cannot be immortal 
because it changes — growing and waning. Anything that changes cannot be 
immortal. Certainly intelligence is manufactured, and that very fact shows us 
that there must be something beyond that. It cannot be free, everything 
connected with matter is in nature, and, therefore, bound for ever. Who is free? 
The free must certainly be beyond cause and effect. If you say that the idea of 
freedom is a delusion, I shall say that the idea of bondage is also a delusion. 
Two facts come into our consciousness, and stand or fall with each other. 

These are our notions of bondage and freedom. If we want to go through a 
wall, and our head bumps against that wall, we see we are limited by that wall. 
At the same time we find a willpower, and think we can direct our will 






everywhere. At every step these contradictory ideas come to us. We have to 
believe that we are free, yet at every moment we find we are not free. If one 
idea is a delusion, the other is also a delusion, and if one is true, the other also 
is true, because both stand upon the same basis — consciousness. The Yogi 
says, both are true; that we are bound so far as intelligence goes, that we are 
free so far as the soul is concerned. It is the real nature of man, the soul, the 
Purusha, which is beyond all law of causation. Its freedom is percolating 
through layers of matter in various forms, intelligence, mind, etc. It is its light 
which is shining through all. Intelligence has no light of its own. Each organ 
has a particular centre in the brain; it is not that all the organs have one centre; 
each organ is separate. Why do all perceptions harmonise? Where do they get 
their unity? If it were in the brain, it would be necessary for all the organs, the 
eyes, the nose, the ears, etc., to have one centre only, while we know for certain 
that there are different centres for each. Both a man can see and hear at the 
same time, so a unity must be there at the back of intelligence. Intelligence is 
connected with the brain, but behind intelligence even stands the Purusha, the 
unit, where all different sensations and perceptions join and become one. The 
soul itself is the centre where all the different perceptions converge and become 
unified. That soul is free, and it is its freedom that tells you every moment that 
you are free. But you mistake, and mingle that Freedom every moment with 
intelligence and mind. You try to attribute that freedom to the intelligence, and 
immediately find that intelligence is not free; you attribute that freedom to the 
body, and immediately nature tells you that you are again mistaken. That is 
why there is this mingled sense of freedom and bondage at the same time. The 
Yogi analyses both what is free and what is bound, and his ignorance vanishes. 
He finds that the Purusha is free, is the essence of that knowledge which, 
coming through the Buddhi, becomes intelligence, and, as such, is bound. 

21. The nature of the experienced is for him. 

Nature has no light of its own. As long as the Purusha is present in it, it appears 
as light. But the light is borrowed; just as the moon's light is reflected. 
According to the Yogis, all the manifestations of nature are caused by nature 
itself, but nature has no purpose in view, except to free the Purusha. 






22. Though destroyed for him whose goal has been gained, yet it is not destroyed, being 
common to others. 

The whole activity of nature is to make the soul know that it is entirely separate 
from nature. When the soul knows this, nature has no more attractions for it. 
But the whole of nature vanishes only for that man who has become free. There 
will always remain an infinite number of others, for whom nature will go on 
working. 

II3311 

23. Junction is the cause of the realization of the nature of both the powers, the experienced and 
its Lord. 

According to this aphorism, both the powers of soul and nature become 
manifest when they are in conjunction. Then all manifestations are thrown out. 
Ignorance is the cause of this conjunction. We see every day that the cause of 
our pain or pleasure is always our joining ourselves with the body. If I were 
perfectly certain that I am not this body, I should take no notice of heat and 
cold, or anything of the kind. This body is a combination. It is only a fiction to 
say that I have one body, you another, and the sun another. The whole universe 
is one ocean of matter, and you are the name of a little particle, and I of 
another, and the sun of another. We know that this matter is continuously 
changing. What is forming the sun one day, the next day may form the matter 
of our bodies. 


M 113^11 


24. Ignorance is its cause. 

Through ignorance we have joined ourselves with a particular body, and thus 
opened ourselves to misery. This idea of body is a simple superstition. It is 
superstition that makes us happy or unhappy. It is superstition caused by 
ignorance that makes us feel heat and cold, pain and pleasure. It is our business 
to rise above this superstition, and the Yogi shows us how we can do this. It has 















been demonstrated that, under certain mental conditions, a man may be burned, 
yet he will feel no pain. The difficulty is that this sudden upheaval of the mind 
comes like a whirlwind one minute, and goes away the next. If, however, we 
gain it through Yoga, we shall permanently attain to the separation of Self from 
the body. 

25. There being absence of that (ignorance) there is absence of junction, which is the thing-to- 
be avoided; that is the independence of the seer. 

According to Yoga philosophy, it is through ignorance that the soul has been 
joined with nature. The aim is to get rid of nature's control over us. That is the 
goal of all religions. Each soul is potentially divine. The goal is to manifest this 
Divinity within, by controlling nature, external and internal. Do this either by 
work, or worship, or psychic control, or philosophy — by one or more or all of 
these — and be free. This is the whole of religion. Doctrines, or dogmas, or 
rituals, or books, or temples, or forms, are but secondary details. The Yogi tries 
to reach this goal through psychic control. Until we can free ourselves from 
nature, we are slaves; as she dictates so we must go. The Yogi claims that he 
who controls mind controls matter also. The internal nature is much higher than 
the external and much more difficult to grapple with, much more difficult to 
control. Therefore he who has conquered the internal nature controls the whole 
universe; it becomes his servant. Raj a-Yoga propounds the methods of gaining 
this control. Forces higher than we know in physical nature will have to be 
subdued. This body is just the external crust of the mind. They are not two 
different things; they are just as the oyster and its shell. They are but two 
aspects of one thing; the internal substance of the oyster takes up matter from 
outside, and manufactures the shell. In the same way the internal fine forces 
which are called mind take up gross matter from outside, and from that 
manufacture this external shell, the body. If, then, we have control of the 
internal, it is very easy to have control of the external. Then again, these forces 
are not different. It is not that some forces are physical, and some mental; the 
physical forces are but the gross manifestations of the fine forces, just as the 
physical world is but the gross manifestation of the fine world. 











26. The means of destruction of ignorance is unbroken practice of discrimination. 


This is the real goal of practice — discrimination between the real and the 
unreal, knowing that the Purusha is not nature, that it is neither matter nor 
mind, and that because it is not nature, it cannot possibly change. It is only 
nature which changes, combining and re-combining, dissolving continually. 
When through constant practice we begin to discriminate, ignorance will 
vanish, and the Purusha will begin to shine in its real nature — omniscient, 
omnipotent, omnipresent. 


M m \m\\ 


27. His knowledge is of the sevenfold highest ground. 

When this knowledge comes; it will come, as it were, in seven grades, one after 
the other; and when one of these begins, we know that we are getting 
knowledge. The first to appear will be that we have known what is to be 
known. The mind will cease to be dissatisfied. While we are aware of thirsting 
after knowledge, we begin to seek here and there, wherever we think we can 
get some truth, and failing to find it we become dissatisfied and seek in a fresh 
direction. All search is vain, until we begin to perceive that knowledge is 
within ourselves, that no one can help us, that we must help ourselves. When 
we begin to practice the power of discrimination, the first sign that we are 
getting near truth will be that that dissatisfied state will vanish. We shall feel 
quite sure that we have found the truth, and that it cannot be anything else but 
the truth. Then we may know that the sun is rising, that the morning is breaking 
for us, and taking courage, we must persevere until the goal is reached. The 
second grade will be the absence of all pains. It will be impossible for anything 
in the universe, external or internal, to give us pain. The third will be the 
attainment of full knowledge. Omniscience will be ours. The fourth will be the 
attainment of the end of all duty through discrimination. Next will come what 
is called freedom of the Chitta. We shall realise that all difficulties and 
struggles, all vacillations of the mind, have fallen down, just as a stone rolls 
from the mountain top into the valley and never comes up again. The next will 
be that the Chitta itself will realise that it melts away into its causes whenever 
we so desire. Lastly we shall find that we are established in our Self, that we 








have been alone throughout the universe, neither body nor mind was ever 
related, much less joined, to us. They were working their own way, and we, 
through ignorance, joined ourselves to them. But we have been alone, 
omnipotent, omnipresent, ever blessed; our own Self was so pure and perfect 
that we required none else. We required none else to make us happy, for we are 
happiness itself. We shall find that this knowledge does not depend on anything 
else; throughout the universe there can be nothing that will not become 
effulgent before our knowledge. This will be the last state, and the Yogi will 
become peaceful and calm, never to feel any more pain, never to be again 
deluded, never to be touched by misery. He will know he is ever blessed, ever 
perfect, almighty. 

28. By the practice of the different parts of Yoga the impurities being destroyed, knowledge be 
comes effulgent up to discrimination. 

Now comes the practical knowledge. What we have just been speaking about is 
much higher. It is away above our heads, but it is the ideal. It is first necessary 
to obtain physical and mental control. Then the realization will become steady 
in that ideal. The ideal being known, what remains is to practice the method of 
reaching it. 




/V 

29. Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranayaama, Pratyah^a, Dh^ana, Dhyana, and SamMhi are the 
eight limbs of Yoga. 

W: ll?o|| 

30. Non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, continence, and nor-receiving are called Yamas. 

A man who wants to be a perfect Yogi must give up the sex idea. The soul has 
no sex; why should it degrade itself with sex ideas? Later on we shall 
understand better why these ideas must be given up. The mind of the man who 
receives gifts is acted on by the mind of the giver, so the receiver is likely to 
become degenerated. Receiving gifts is prone to destroy the independence of 




















the mind, and make us slavish. Therefore, receive no gifts. 


31. These, unbroken by time, place, purpose, and caste-rules, are (universal) great vows. 

These practices — non-killing, truthfulness, non-stealing, chastity, and non¬ 
receiving — are to be practiced by every man, woman, and child; by every 
soul, irrespective of nation, country, or position. 


ten: 


32. Internal and external purification, contentment, mortification, study, and warship of God 
are the Niyamas. 

External purification is keeping the body pure; a dirty man will never be a 
Yogi. There must be internal purification also. That is obtained by the virtues 
named in 1.33. Of course, internal purity is of greater value than external, but 
both are necessary, and external purity, without internal, is of no good. 


II33II! 


33. To obstruct thoughts which are inimical to Yoga, contrary thoughts should be brought. 

That is the way to practice the virtues that have been stated. For instance, when 
a big wave of anger has come into the mind, how are we to control that? Just by 
raising an opposing wave. Think of love. Sometimes a mother is very angry 
with her husband, and while in that state, the baby comes in, and she kisses the 
baby; the old wave dies out and a new wave arises, love for the child. That 
suppresses the other one. Love is opposite to anger. Similarly, when the idea of 
stealing comes, non-stealing should be thought of; when the idea of receiving 
gifts comes, replace it by a contrary thought. 

TIM ll?^ll 

34. The obstructions to Yoga are killing, falsehood, etc., whether committed, caused' or 
approved; either through avarice, or anger, or ignorance; whether slight, middling, or great; and 






























they result in infinite ignorance and misery. This is (the method of) thinking the contrary. 


If I tell a lie, or cause another to tell one, or approve of another doing so, it is 
equally sinful. If it is a very mild lie, still it is a lie. Every vicious thought will 
rebound, every thought of hatred which you may have thought, in a cave even, 
is stored up' and will one day come back to you with tremendous power in the 
form of some misery here. If you project hatred and jealousy, they will rebound 
on you with compound interest. No power can avert them; when once you have 
put them in motion, you will have to bear them. Remembering this will prevent 
you from doing wicked things. 

fepi: ll?^ll 

35. Non-killing being established, in his presence all enmities cease (in others). 

If a man gets the ideal of non-injuring others, before him even animals which 
are by their nature ferocious will become peaceful. The tiger and the lamb will 
play together before that Yogi. When you have come to that state, then alone 
you will understand that you have become firmly established in non-injuring. 




36. By the establishment of truthfulness the Yogi gets the power of attaining for himself and 
others the fruits of work without the works. 

When this power of truth will be established with you, then even in dream you 
will never tell an untruth. You will be true in thought, word' and deed. 
Whatever you say will be truth. You may say to a man, "Be blessed," and that 
man will be blessed. If a man is diseased, and you say to him, "Be thou cured," 
he will be cured immediately. 




37. By the establishment of non-stealing all wealth comes to the Yogi. 

The more you fly from nature, the more she follows you; and if you do not care 
for her at all, she becomes your slave. 













38. By the establishment of continence energy is gained. 

The chaste brain has tremendous energy and gigantic will-power. Without 
chastity there can be no spiritual strength. Continence gives wonderful control 
over mankind. The spiritual leaders of men have been very continent, and this 
is what gave them power. Therefore the Yogi must be continent. 

39. When he is fixed in non-receiving, he gets the memory of past life. 

When a man does not receive presents, he does not become beholden to others, 
but remains independent and free. His mind becomes pure. With every gift, he 
is likely to receive the evils of the giver. If he does not receive, the mind is 
purified, and the first power it gets is memory of past life. Then alone the Yogi 
becomes perfectly fixed in his ideal. He sees that he has been coming and 
going many times, so he becomes determined that this time he will be free, that 
he will no more come and go, and be the slave of Nature. 




40. Internal and external cleanliness being established, there arise disgust for one's own body, 
and non-intercourse with others. 

When there is real purification of the body, external and internal, there arises 
neglect of the body, and the idea of keeping it nice vanishes. A face which 
others call most beautiful will appear to the Yogi as merely animal, if there is 
not intelligence behind it. What the world calls a very common face he regards 
as heavenly, if the spirit shines behind it. This thirst after body is the great bane 
of human life. So the first sign of the establishment of purity is that you do not 
care to think you are a body. It is only when purity comes that we get rid of the 
body idea. 




41. There are also arises purification of the Sattva, cheerfulness of the mind, concentration. 













conquest of the organs, and fitness for the realization of the Self. 


By the practice of cleanliness, the Sattva material prevails, and the mind 
becomes concentrated and cheerful. The first sign that you are becoming 
religious is that you are becoming cheerful. When a man is gloomy, that may 
be dyspepsia, but it is not religion. A pleasurable feeling is the nature of the 
Sattva. Everything is pleasurable to the Sattvika man, and when this comes, 
know that you are progressing in Yoga. All pain is caused by Tamas, so you 
must get rid of that; moroseness is one of the Exults of Tamas. The strong, the 
well knit, the young, the healthy, the daring alone are fit to be Yogis. To the 
Yogi 

everything is bliss, every human face that he sees brings cheerfulness to him. 
That is the sign of a virtuous man. Misery is caused by sin, and by no other 
cause. What business have you with clouded faces? It is terrible. If you have a 
clouded face, do not go out that day, shut yourself up in your room. What right 
have you to carry this disease out into the world ? When your mind has become 
controlled, you have control over the whole body; instead of being a slave to 
this machine, the machine is your slave. Instead of this machine being able to 
drag the soul down, it becomes its greatest helpmate. 

42. From contentment comes superlative happiness. 

43. The result of mortification is brewing powers to the organs and the body, by destroying the 
impurity. 

The results of mortification are seen immediately, sometimes by heightened 
powers of vision, hearing things at a distance, and so on. 




44. By the repetition of the Mantra comes the realisatian of the intended deity. 
The higher the beings that you want to get the harder is the practice. 










45. By sacrificing all to Ishvara comes Samadhi. 

By resignation to the Lord, Samadhi becomes perfect, 
ll^ll 

46. Posture is that which is firm and pleasant. 

Now comes Asana, posture. Until you can get a firm seat you cannot practice 
the breathing and other exercises. Firmness of seat means that you do not feel 
the body at all. In the ordinary way, you will find that as soon as you sit for a 
few minutes all sorts of disturbances come into the body; but when you have 
got beyond the idea of a concrete body, you will lose all sense of the body. You 
will feel neither pleasure nor pain. And when you take your body up again, it 
will feel so rested. It is only perfect rest that you can give to the body. When 
you have succeeded in conquering the body and keeping it firm, your practice 
will remain firm, but while you are disturbed by the body, your nerves become 
disturbed, and you cannot concentrate the mind. 

47. By lessening the natural tendency (for restlessness) and meditating on the unlimited, 
posture becomes firm and pleasant. 

We can make the seat firm by thinking of the infinite. We cannot think of the 
Absolute Infinite, but we can think of the infinite sky. 


ll^^ll 


48. Seat being conquered, the dualities do not obstruct. 

The dualities, good and bad, heat and cold, and all the pairs of opposites, will 
not then disturb you. 

























49. Controlling the motion of the exhalation and the inhalation follows after this. 

When posture has been conquered, then the motion of the Prana is to be broken 
and controlled. Thus we come to Pranayama, the controlling of the vital forces 
of the body. Prana is not breath, though it is usually so translated. It is the sum 
total of the cosmic energy. It is the energy that is in each body, and its most 
apparent manifestation is the motion of the lungs. This motion is caused by 
Prana drawing in the breath, and it is what we seek to control in Pranayama. 

We begin by controlling the breath, as the easiest way of getting control of the 
Prana. 

50. Its modifications are either external or internal, or motionless, regulated by place, terns, and 
number, either long or short. 

The three sorts of motion of Pranayama are, one by which we draw the breath 
in, another by which we throw it out, and the third action is when the breath is 
held in the lungs, or stopped from entering the lungs. These, again, are varied 
by place and time. By place is meant that the Prana is held to some particular 
part of the body. By time is meant how long the Prana should be confined to a 
certain place, and so we are told how many seconds to keep one motion, and 
how many seconds to keep another. The result of this Pranayama is Udghata, 
awakening the Kundalini. 

51. The fourth is restraining the Prana by reflecting on external or internal object. 

This is the fourth sort of Pranayama, in which the Kumbhaka is brought about 
by long practice attended with reflection, which is absent in the other three. 




52. From that, the covering to the light of the Chitta is attenuated. 

The Chitta has, by its own nature, all knowledge. It is made of Sattva particles, 
but is covered by Rajas and Tamas particles, and by Pranayama this covering is 
















removed. 




53. The mind becomes fit for Dharana. 

After this covering has been removed, we are able to concentrate the mind. 

54. The drawing in of the organs is by their giving up their own objects and taking the form of 
the mind-stuff, as it were. 

The organs are separate states of the mind-stuff. I see a book; the form is not in 
the book, it is in the mind. Something is outside which calls that form up. The 
real form is in the Chitta. The organs identify themselves with, and take the 
forms of, whatever comes to them. If you can restrain the mind-stuff from 
taking these forms, the mind will remain calm. This is called Pratyahara. 




55. Thence arises supreme control of the organs. 

When the Yogi has succeeded in preventing the organs from taking the forms 
of external objects, and in making them remain one with the mind-stuff, then 
comes perfect control of the organs. When the organs are perfectly under 
control, every muscle and nerve will be under control, because the organs are 
the centres of all the sensations, and of all actions. These organs are divided 
into organs of work and organs of sensation. When the organs are controlled, 
the Yogi can control all feeling and doing; the whole of the body comes under 
his control. Then alone one begins to feel joy in being born; then one can 
truthfully say, "Blessed am I that I was born." When that control of the organs 
is obtained, we feel how wonderful this body really is. 


» 


















« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
CHAPTER HI 
POWERS 

We have now come to the chapter in which the Yoga powers are described. 


wn ll?ll 


1. Dharana is holding the mind on to some particular object. 

Dharana (concentration) is when the mind holds on to some object, either in the 
body, or outside the body, and keeps itself in that state. 




2. An unbroken flow of knowledge in that object is Dhyana. 

The mind tries to think of one object, to hold itself to one particular spot, as the 
top of the head, the heart, etc., and if the mind succeeds in receiving the 
sensations only through that part of the body, and through no other part, that 
would be Dharana, and when the mind succeeds in keeping itself in that state 
for some time, it is called Dhyana (mediation). 

ll?ll 

3. When that, giving up all forms, reflects only the meaning, it is SamMhi. 

That comes when in meditation the form or the external part is given up. 
Suppose I were meditating on a book, and that I have gradually succeeded in 
concentrating the mind on it, and perceiving only the internal sensations, the 
meaning, unexpressed in any form — that state of Dhyana is called Samadhi. 


II ^11 

















4. (These) three (when practiced) in regard to one object is Sarnyama. 


When a man can direct his mind to any particular object and fix it there, and 
then keep it there for a long time, separating the object from the internal part, 
this is Sarny ama; or Dharana, Dhyana, and Samadhi, one following the other, 
and making one. The form of the thing has vanished, and only its meaning 
remains in the mind. 


llkll 


5. By the conquest of that comes light of knowledge. 

When one has succeeded in making this Samyama, all powers come under his 
control. This is the great instrument of the Yogi. The objects of knowledge are 
infinite, and they are divided into the gross, grosser, grossest and the fine, finer, 
finest and so on. This Samyama should be first applied to gross things, and 
when you begin to get knowledge of this gross, slowly, by stages, it should be 
brought to finer things. 


M IISII 


6. That should be employed in stages. 

This is a note of warning not to attempt to go too fast. 


ll^ll 


7. These three are more internal than those that precede. 

A. 

Before these we had the Pratyahara, the Pranayama, the Asana, the Yama and 
Niyama; they are external parts of the three — Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi. 
When a man has attained to them, he may attain to omniscience and 
omnipotence, but that would not be salvation. These three would; not make the 
mind Nirvikalpa, changeless, but would leave the seeds for getting bodies 
again. Only when the seeds are, as the Yogi says, "fried", do they lose the 
possibility of producing further plants. These powers cannot fry the seed. 










8. But even they are external to the seedless (Samadhi). 


Compared with that seedless Samadhi, therefore, even these are external. We 
have not yet reached the real Samadhi, the highest, but a lower stage, in which 
this universe still exists as we see it, and in which are all these powers. 




9. By the suppression of the disturbed impressions of the mind, and by the rise of impressions 
of control, the mind, which persists in that moment of control, is said to attain the controlling 
modifications. 

That is to say, in this first state of Samadhi the modifications of the mind have 
been controlled, but not perfectly, because if tines were, there would be no 
modifications. If there is a modification which impels the mind to rush out 
through the senses, and the Yogi tries to control it, that very control itself will 
be a modification. One wave will be checked by another wave, so it will not be 
real Samadhi in which all the waves subside, as control itself will be a wave. 
Yet this lower Samadhi is very much nearer to the higher Samadhi than when 
the mind comes bubbling out. 




10. Its flow becomes steady by habit. 

The flow of this continuous control of the mind becomes steady when practiced 
day after day, and the mind obtains the faculty of constant concentration. 

^cjMchUJd^l: m\\ 

11. Taking in all sorts of objects, and concentrating upon one object, these two powers being 
destroyed and manifested respectively, the Chitta gets the modification called Samadhi. 

The mind takes up various objects, runs into all sorts of things. That is the 
lower state. There is a higher state of the mind, when it takes up one object and 
excludes all others, of which Samadhi is the result. 


















12. The one-pointedness of the Chitta is when the impression that is past and that which is 
present are similar. 

How are we to know that the mind has become concentrated? Because the idea 
of time will vanish. The more time passes unnoticed the more concentrated we 
are. In common life we see that when we are interested in a book we do not 
note the time at all, and when we leave the book, we are often surprised to find 
how many hours have passed. All time will have the tendency to come and 
stand in the one present. So the definition is given: When the past and present 
come and stand in one, the mind is said to be concentrated.* 

13. By this is explained the threefold transformation of form, time and state, in fine or gross 
matter and in the organs. 

By the threefold changes in the mind-stuff as to form, time and state are 
explained the corresponding changes in gross and subtle matter and in the 
organs. Suppose there is a lump of gold. It is transformed into a bracelet and 
again into an ear-ring. These are changes as to form. The same phenomena 
looked at from the standpoint of time give us change as to time. Again, the 
bracelet or the ear-ring may be bright or dull, thick or thin, and so on. This is 
change as to state. Now referring to the aphorisms 9,11 and 12, the mind-stuff 
is changing into Vrittis — this is change as to form. That it passes through past, 
present and future moments of time is change as to time. That the impressions 
vary as to intensity within one particular period, say, present, is change as to 
state. The concentrations taught in the preceding aphorisms were to give the 
Yogi a voluntary control over the transformations of his mind-stuff, which 
alone will enable him to make the Sarnyama named in III. 4. 

14. That which is acted upon by transformations, either past, present, or yet to be manifested is 
the qualified. 

That is to say, the qualified is the substance which is being acted upon by time 










and by the Samskaras, and getting changed and being manifested always. 




15. The succession of changes is the cause of manifold evolution. 

m\\ 

16. By making Samyama on the three sorts of changes comes the knowledge of past and future. 

We must not lose sight of the first definition of Samyama. When the mind has 
attained to that state when it identifies itself with the internal impression of the 
object, leaving the external, and when, by long practice, that is retained by the 
mind and the mind can get into that state in a moment, that is Samyama. If a 
man in that state wants to know the past and future, he has to make a Samyama 
on the changes in the Samskaras (III. 13). Some are working now at present, 
some have worked out, and some are waiting to work. So by making a 
Samyama on these he knows the past and future. 

17. By making Samyama on word, meaning and knowledge, which are ordinarily confused, 
comes the knowledge of all animal sounds. 

The word represents the external cause, the meaning represents the internal 
vibration that travels to the brain through the channels of the Indriyas, 
conveying the external impression to the mind, and knowledge represents the 
of the mind, with which comes perception. These three, confused, make our 
sense-objects. Suppose I hear a word; there is first the external vibration, next 
the internal sensation carried to the mind by the organ of hearing, then the mind 
reacts, and I know the word. The word I know is a mixture of the three — 
vibration, sensation, and reaction. Ordinarily these three are inseparable; but by 
practice the Yogi can separate them. When a man has attained to this, if he 
makes a Samyama on any sound, he understands the meaning which that sound 
was intended to express, whether it was made by man or be any other animal. 


11 11 














18. By perceiving the impressions, (comes) the knowledge of past life. 


Each experience that we have, comes in the form of a wave in the Chitta, and 
this subsides and becomes finer and finer, but is never lost. It remains there in 
minute form, and if we can bring this wave up again, it becomes memory. So, 
if the Yogi can make a Samyama on these past impressions in the mind, he will 
begin to remember all his past lives. 




19. By making Samyama on the signs in another's body, knowledge of his mind comes. 

Each man has particular signs on his body, which differentiate him from others; 
when the Yogi makes a Samyama on these signs he knows the nature of the 
mind of that person. 




20. But not its contents, that not being the object of the Samyama. 

He would not know the contents of the mind by making a Samyama on the 
body. There would be required a twofold Samyama, first on the signs in the 
body, and then on the mind itself. The Yogi would then know everything that is 
in that mind. 




21. By making Samyama on the form of the body, the perceptibility of the form being 
obstructed and the power of manifestation in the eye being separated, the Yogi's body becomes 
unseen. 


A Yogi standing in the midst of this room can apparently vanish. He does not 
really vanish, but he will not be seen by anyone. The forte and the body are, as 
it were, separated. You must remember that this can only be done when the 
Yogi has attained to that power of concentration when form and the thing 
formed have been separated. Then he makes a Samyama on that, and the power 
to perceive forms is obstructed, because the power of perceiving forms comes 
from the junction of form and the thing formed. 















22. By this the disappearance or concealment of words which are being spoken and such other 
things are also explained. 

23. Karma is of two kinds — soon to be fructified and late to be fructified. By making 
Sarnyarna on these, or by the signs called Arishta, portents, the Yogis know the exact time of 
separation from their bodies. 

When a Yogi makes a Samyama on his own Karma, upon those impressions in 
his mind which are now working, and those which are just waiting to work, he 
knows exactly by those that are waiting when his body will fall. He knows 
when he will die, at what hour, even at what minute. The Hindus think very 
much of that knowledge or consciousness of the nearness of death, because it is 
taught in the Gita that the thoughts at the moment of departure are great powers 
in determining the next life. 

24. By making Samyama on friendship, mercy, etc. (I. 33) , the Yogi excels in the respective 
qualities. 

25. By making Samyama on the strength of the elephant and others, their respective strength 
comes to the Yogi. 

When a Yogi has attained to this Samyama and wants strength, he makes a 
Samyama on the strength of the elephant and gets it. Infinite energy is at the 
disposal of everyone if he only knows how to get it. The Yogi has discovered 
the science of getting it. 


26. By making Samyama on the Effulgent Light (I. 36) , comes the knowledge of the fine, the 
obstructed, and the remote. 
















When the Yogi makes Samyama on that Effulgent Light in the heart, he sees 
things which are very remote, things, for instance, that are happening in a 
distant place, and which are obstructed by mountain barriers, and also things 
which are very fine. 


11:3^11 


27. By making Samyama on the sun, (comes) the knowledge of the world. 




28. On the moon, (comes) the knowledge of the cluster of stars. 

29. On the pole-star, (comes) the knowledge of the motions of the stars. 




30. On the navel circle, (comes) the knowledge of the constitution of the body. 

31. On the hollow of the throat, (comes) cessation of hunger. 

When a man is very hungry, if he can make Samyama on the hollow of the 
throat, hunger ceases. 

32. On the nerve called Kurma, (comes) fixity of the body. 

When he is practising, the body is not disturbed. 


33. On the light emanating from the top of the head, sight of the Siddhas. 












Siddhas are beings who are a little above ghosts When the Yogi concentrates 
his mind on the top of his head, he will see these Siddhas. The word Siddha 
does not refer to those mere who have become free — a sense in which it is 
often used. 

34. Or by the power of Pratibha, all knowledge. 

All these can come without any Samyama to the man who has the power of 
Pratibha (spontaneous enlightenment from purity). When a man has risen to a 
high state of Pratibha, he has that great light. All things are apparent to him. 
Everything comes to him naturally without making Samyama. 

35. In the heart, knowledge of minds. 

36. Enjoyment comes from the non-discrimination of the soul and Sattva which are totally 
different because the latter's actions are for another. Samyama on the self-centred one gives 
knowledge of the Purusha. 

All action of Sattva, a modification of Prakriti characterised by light and 
happiness, is for the soul. When Sattva is free from egoism and illuminated 
with the pure intelligence of Purusha, it is called the self-centred one, because 
in that state it becomes independent of all relations. 




37. From that arises the knowledge belonging to Pratibha and (supernatural) hearing, touching, 
seeing, tasting and smelling. 

38. These are obstacles to Samadhi; but they are posters in the worldly state. 

To the Yogi knowledge of the enjoyments of the world comes by the junction 


















of the Pumsha and the mind. If he wants to make Samyama on the knowledge 
that they are two different things, nature and soul, he gets knowledge of the 
Purusha. From that arises discrimination. When he has got that discrimination, 
he gets the Pratibha, the light of supreme genius. These powers, however, are 
obstructions to the attainment of the highest goal, the knowledge of the pure 
Self, and freedom. These are, as it were, to be met in the way; and if the Yogi 
rejects them, he attains the highest. If he is tempted to acquire these, his further 
progress is barred. 




39. When the cause of bondage of the Chitta has become loosened, the Yogi, by his knowledge 
of its channels of activity (the nerves), enters another's body. 

The Yogi can enter a dead body and make it get up and move, even while he 
himself is working in another body. Or he can enter a living body and hold that 
man's mind and organs in check, and for the time being act through the body of 
that man. That is done by the Yogi coming to this discrimination of Purusha 
and nature. If he w ants to enter another's body, he makes a Samyama on that 
body and enters it, because, not only is his soul omnipresent, but his mind also, 
as the Yogi teaches. It is one bit of the universal mind. Now, however, it can 
only work; through the nerve currents in this body, but when the Yogi has 
loosened himself from these nerve currents, he can work through other things. 

40. By conquering the current called Udana the Yogi does not sink in water or in swamps, he 
can walk on thorns etc., and can, die at will. 

Udana is the name of the nerve current that governs the lungs and all the upper 
parts of the body, and when he is master of it, he becomes light in weight. He 
does not sink in water; he can walk on thorns and sword blades, and stand in 
fire, and can depart this life whenever he likes. 




41. By the conquest of the current Samana he is surrounded by a blaze of light. 














Whenever he likes, light flashes from his body. 




42. By making Samyama on the relation between the ear and the Akasha comes divine hearing. 

There is the Akasha, the ether, and the instrument, the ear. By making 
Samyama on them the Yogi gets supernormal hearing; he hears everything. 
Anything spoken or sounded miles away he can hear. 

I 11 I 

43. By making Samyama an the relation between the Akasha and the body and becoming light 
as cotton-wool etc., through meditation on them, the yogi goes through the skies. 

This Akasha is the material of this body; it is only Akasha in a certain form that 
has become the body. If the Yogi makes a Sanyama on this Akasha material of 
his body, it acquires the lightness of Akasha, and he can go anywhere through 
the air. So in the other case also. 




44. By making Samyama on the "real modifications" of the mind, outside of the body, called 
great disembodiedness, comes disappearance of the covering to light. 

The mind in its foolishness thinks that it is working in this body. Why should I 
be bound by one system of nerves, and put the Ego only in one body, if the 
mind is omnipresent? There is no reason why I should. The Yogi wants to feel 
the Ego wherever he likes. The mental waves which arise in the absence of 
egoism in the body are called "real modifications" or "great disembodiedness". 
When he has succeeded in making Samyama on these modifications, all 
covering to light goes away, and all darkness and ignorance vanish. Everything 
appears to him to be full of knowledge. 

45. By making Samyama on the gross and fine forms of the elements, their essential traits, the 
inherence of the Gunas in them and an their contributing to the experience of the soul, comes 





















mastery of the elements. 


The Yogi makes Sarnyama on the elements, first on the gross, and then on the 
finer states. This Samyama is taken up more by a sect of the Buddhists. They 
take a lump of clay and make Samyama on that, and gradually they begin to see 
the fine materials of which it is composed, and when they have known all the 
fine materials in it, they get power over that element. So with all the elements. 
The Yogi can conquer them all. 

11^ II 

46. From that comes minuteness and the rest of the powers, "glorification of the body," and 
indestructibleness of the bodily qualities. 

This means that the Yogi has attained the eight powers. He can make himself 
as minute as a particle, or as huge as a mountain, as heavy as the earth, or as 
light as the air; he can reach anything he likes, he can rule everything he wants, 
he can conquer everything he wants, and so on. A lion will sit at his feet like a 
lamb, and all his desires will be fulfilled at will. 




47. The "glorification of the body" is beauty, complexion, strength, adamantine hardness. 

The body becomes indestructible. Nothing can injure it. Nothing can destroy it 
until the Yogi wishes. "Breaking the rod of time he lives in this universe with 
his body." In the Vedas it is written that for that man there is no more disease, 
death or pain. 


^^L||(?Hdl-c|^|t'ic|Tc|d4t^lfy^^-3|^l: ll^^ll 


48. By making Samyama on the objectivity and pointer of illumination of the organs, on 
egoism the inherence of the Gunas in them and on their contributing to the experience of the 
soul, comes the conquest of the organs. 

In the perception of external objects the organs leave their place in the mind 
and go towards the object; this is followed by knowledge. Egoism also is 
present in the act. When the Yogi makes Samyama on these and the other two 




















by gradation, he conquers the organs. Take up anything that you see or feel, a 
book for instance; first concentrate the mind on it, then on the knowledge that 
is in the form of a book, and then on the Ego that sees the book, and so on. By 
that practice all the organs will be conquered. 


Eel ii^^ii 


49. From that comes to the body the power of rapid movement like the mind, power of the 
organs independently of the body, and conquest of nature. 

Just as by the conquest of the elements comes glorified body, so from the 
conquest of the organs will come the above mentioned powers. 


50. By making Samyama on the discrimination between the Sattva and the Purusha come 
omnipotence and omniscience. 

When nature has been conquered, and the difference between the Purusha and 
nature realised — that the Purusha is indestructible, pure and perfect — then 
come omnipotence and omniscience. 

51. By giving up even these powers comes the destruction of the very seed of evil, which leads 
to Kaivalya. 

He attains aloneness, independence, and becomes free. When one gives up 
even the ideas of omnipotence and omniscience, there comes entire rejection of 
enjoyment, of the temptations from celestial beings. When the Yogi has seen 
all these wonderful powers, and rejected them, he reaches the goal. What are all 
these powers? Simply manifestations. They are no better than dreams. Even 
omnipotence is a dream. It depends on the mind. So long as there is a mind it 
can be understood, but the goal is beyond even the mind. 


11^511 


52. The Yogi should not feel allured or flattered by the overtures of celestial beings for fear of 






















evil again. 


There are other dangers too; gods and other beings come to tempt the Yogi. 
They do not want anyone to be perfectly free. They are jealous, Just as we are, 
and worse than us sometimes. They are very much afraid of losing their places. 
Those Yogis who do not reach perfection die and become gods; leaving the 
direct road they go into one of the side streets, and get these powers. Then, 
again, they have to be born. But he who is strong enough to withstand these 
temptations and go straight to the goal, becomes free. 




53. By making Samyama on a particle of time and its precession and succession comes 
discrimination. 

How are we to avoid all these things, these Devas, and heavens, and powers? 
By discrimination, by knowing good from evil. Therefore a Samyama is given 
by which the power of discrimination can be strengthened. This by making a 
Samyama on a particle of time, and the time preceding and following it. 

54. Those things which cannot be differentiated by species, sign, and place, even they will be 
discriminated bit the above Samyama. 

The misery that we suffer comes from ignorance, from non-discrimination 
between the real and the unreal. We all take the bad for the good, the dream for 
the reality. Soul is the only reality, and we have forgotten it. Body is an unreal 
dream, and we think we are all bodies. This non-discrimination is the cause of 
misery. It is caused by ignorance. When discrimination comes, it brings 
strength, and then alone can we avoid all these various ideas of body, heavens, 
and gods. This ignorance arises through differentiating by species, sign, and 
place. For instance, take a cow. The cow is differentiated from the dog by 
species. Even with the cows alone how do we make the distinction between one 
cow and another? By signs. If two objects are exactly similar, they can be 
distinguished if they are in different places. When objects are so mixed up that 
even these differential will not help us, the power of discrimination acquired by 











the above-mentioned practice will give us the ability to distinguish them. The 
highest philosophy of the Yogi is based upon this fact, that the Purusha is pure 
and perfect, and is the only "simple" that exists in this universe. The body and 
mind are compounds, and yet we are ever identifying ourselves with them This 
is the great mistake that the distinction has been lost. When this power of 
discrimination has been attained, man sees that everything in this world, mental 
and physical, is a compound, and, as such, cannot be the Purusha. 




55. The saving knowledge is that knowledge of discrimination which simultaneously covers all 
objects, in all their variations. 

Saving, because the knowledge takes the Yogi across the ocean of birth and 
death. The whole of Prakrit! in all its states, subtle and gross, is within the 
grasp of this knowledge. There is no succession in perception by this 
knowledge; it takes in all things simultaneously, at a glance. 




56. By the similarity of purity between the Sattva and the Purusha comes Kaivalya. 

When the soul realises that it depends on nothing in the universe, from gods to 
the lowest atom, that is called Kaivalya (isolation) and perfection. It is attained 
when this mixture of purity and impurity called Sattva (intellect) has been 
made as pure as the Purusha itself; then the Sattva reflects only the unqualified 
essence of purity, which is the Purusha. 


» 











« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 


PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
CHAPTER IV 
INDEPENDENCE 




1. The Siddhis (powers) are attained by birth, chemical means, power of words, mortification, 
or concentration. 

Sometimes a man is born with the Siddhis, powers, of course, those he had 
earned in his previous incarnation. This time he is born, as it were, to enjoy the 
fruits of them. It is said of Kapila, the great father of the Sankhya philosophy, 
that he was a born Siddha, which means literally a man who has attained to 
success. 

The Yogis claim that these powers can be gained by chemical means. All of 
you know that chemistry originally began as alchemy; men went in search of 
the philosopher's stone and elixirs of life, and so forth. In India there was a sect 
called the Rasayanas. Their idea was that ideality, knowledge, spirituality, and 
religion were all very right, but that the body was the only instrument by which 
to attain to all these. If the body came to an end every now and again, it would 
take so much more time to attain to the goal. For instance, a man wants to 
practice Yoga, or wants to become spiritual. Before he has advanced very far 
he dies. Then he takes another body and begins again, then dies, and so on. In 
this way much time will be lost in dying and being born again. If the body 
could be made strong and perfect, so that it would get rid of birth and death, we 
should have so much more time to become spiritual. So these Rasayanas say, 
first make the body very strong. They claim that this body can be made 
immortal. Their idea is that if the mind manufactures the body, and if it be true 
that each mind is only one out let to the infinite energy, there should be no limit 
to each outlet getting any amount of power from outside. Why is it impossible 
to keep over bodies all the time? We have to manufacture all the bodies that we 
ever have. As soon as this body dies, we shall have to manufacture another If 









we can do that, why cannot we do it just here and now, without getting out or 
the present body? The theory is perfectly correct. If it its possible that we live 
after death, and make other bodies, why is it impossible that we should have 
the power of making bodies here, without entirely dissolving this body, simply 
changing it continually? They also thought that in mercury and in sulphur was 
hidden the most wonderful power, and that by certain preparations of these a 
man could keep the body as long as he liked. Others believed that certain drugs 
could bring powers, such as flying through the air. Many of the most wonderful 
medicines of the present day we owe to the Rasayanas, notably the use of 
metals in medicine. Certain sects of Yogis claim that many of their principal 
teachers are still living in their old bodies. Patanjali, the great authority on 
Yoga, does not deny this. 

The power of words. There are certain sacred words called Mantras, which 
have power, when repeated under proper conditions, produce these 
extraordinary powers. We are living in the midst of such a mass of miracles, 
day and night, that we do not think anything of them. There is no limit to man's 
ponder, the power of words and the power of mind. 

Mortification. You find that in every religion mortification and asceticisms 
shave been practiced. In these religious conceptions the Hindus always go to 
the extremes. You will find men with their hands up all their lives, until their 
hands wither and die. Men keep standing, day and night, until their feet swell, 
and if they live, the legs become so stiff in this position that they can no more 
bend them, but have to stand all their lives. I once saw a man who had kept his 
hands raised in this way, and I asked him how it felt when he did it first. He 
said it was awful torture. It was such torture that he had to go to a river and put 
himself in water, and that allayed the pain for a little while. After a month he 
did not suffer much. Through such practices powers (Siddhis) can be attained. 

Concentration. Concentration is SamMhi, and that is Yoga proper; that is the 
principal theme of this science, and it is the highest means. The preceding ones 
are only secondary, and we cannot attain to the highest through them. Samadhi 
is the means through which we can gain anything and everything, mental, 
moral, or spiritual. 


3TT^-d^L|R^IH: ll^ll 


2. The change into another species is by the filling in of nature. 

Patanjali has advanced the proposition that these powers come by birth, 
sometimes by chemical means, or through mortification. He also admits that 
this body can be kept for any length of time. Now he goes on to state what is 
the cause of the change of the body into another species. He says this is done 
by the filling in of nature, which he explains in the next aphorism. 

ll?ll 

3. Good and bad deeds are not the direct causes in the transformations of nature, but they act as 
breakers of obstacles to the evolutions of nature: as a farmer breaks the obstacles to the course 
of water, which then runs; down by its own nature. 

The water for irrigation of fields is already in the canal, only shut in by gates. 
The farmer opens these gates, and the water flows in by itself, by the law of 
gravitation. So all progress and power are already in every man; perfection is 
man's nature, only it is barred in and prevented from taking its proper course. If 
anyone can take the bar off, in rushes nature. Then the man attains the powers 
which are his already. Those we call wicked become saints, as soon as the bar 
is broken and nature rushes in. It is nature that is driving us towards perfection, 
and eventually she will bring everyone there. All these practices and struggles 
to become religious are only negative work, to take off the bars, and open the 
doors to that perfection which is our birthright, our nature. 

Today the evolution theory of the ancient Yogis will be better understood in the 
light of modern research. And yet the theory of the Yogis is a better 
explanation. The two causes of evolution advanced by the moderns, viz sexual 
selection and survival of the fittest, are inadequate. Suppose human knowledge 
to have advanced so much as to eliminate competition, both from the function 
of acquiring physical sustenance and of acquiring a mate. Then, according to 
the moderns, human progress will stop and the race will die. The result of this 
theory is to furnish every oppressor with an argument to calm the qualms of 
conscience. Men are not lacking, who, posing as philosophers, want to kill out 
all wicked and incompetent persons (they are, of course, the only judges of 











competency) and thus preserve the human race! But the great ancient 
evolutionist, Patanjali, declares that the true secret of evolution is the 
manifestation of the perfection which is already in every being; that this 
perfection has been barred and the infinite tide behind is struggling to express 
itself. These struggles and competitions are but the results of our ignorance, 
because we do not know the proper way to unlock the gate and let the water in. 
This infinite tide behind must express itself; it is the cause of all manifestation. 
Competitions for life or sex-gratification are only momentary, unnecessary, 
extraneous effects, caused by ignorance. Even when all competition has ceased, 
this perfect nature behind will make us go forward until everyone has become 
perfect. Therefore there is no reason to believe that competition is necessary to 
progress. In the animal the man was suppressed, but as soon as the door was 
opened, out rushed man. So in man there is the potential god, kept in by the 
locks and bars of ignorance. When knowledge breaks these bars, the god 
becomes manifest. 


II8II 


4. From egoism alone proceed the created minds. 

The theory of Karma is that we suffer for our good or bad deeds, and the whole 
scope of philosophy is to reach the glory of man. All the scriptures sing the 
glory of man, of the soul, and then, in the same breath, they preach Karma. A 
good deed brings such a result, and a bad deed such another, but if the soul can 
be acted upon by a good or a bad deed, the soul amounts to nothing. Bad deeds 
put a bar to the manifestation of the nature of the Purusha; good deeds take the 
obstacles off, and the glory of the Purusha becomes manifest. The Purusha 
itself is never changed. Whatever you do never destroys your own glory, your 
own nature, because the soul cannot be acted upon by anything, only a veil is 
spread before it, hiding its perfection. 

With a view to exhausting their Karma quickly. Yogis create Kaya-vyuha, or 
groups of bodies, in which to work it out. For all these bodies they create minds 
from egoism. These are called "created minds", in contradistinction to their 
original minds. 







5. Though the activities of the different created minds are various, the one original mind is the 
controller of them all. 

These different minds, which act in these different bodies are called made- 
minds, and the bodies, made-bodies; that is, manufactured bodies and minds. 
Matter and mind are like two inexhaustible storehouses. When you become a 
Yogi, you learn the secret of their control. It was yours all the time, but you had 
forgotten it. When you become a Yogi, you recollect it. Then you can do 
anything with it, manipulate it in every way you like. The material out of which 
a manufactured mind is created is the very same material which is used for the 
macrocosm. It is not that mind is one thing and matter another, they are 
different aspects of the same thing. Asmita, egoism, is the material, the fine 
state of existence out of which these made-minds and made-bodies of the Yogi 
are manufactured. Therefore, when the Yogi has found the secret of these 
energies of nature, he can manufacture any number of bodies or minds out of 
the substance known as egoism. 


ETW lien 


6. Among the various Chittas, that which is attained by Samadhi is desireless. 

Among all the various minds that we see in various men, only that mind which 
has attained to Samadhi, perfect concentration, is the highest. A man who has 
attained certain powers through medicines, or through words, or through 
mortifications, still has desires, but that man who has attained to Samadhi 
through concentration is alone free from all desires. 

7. Works are neither black nor white for the Yogis; for others they are threefold — black, 
white, and mixed. 

When the Yogi has attained perfection, his actions, and the Karma produced by 
those actions, do not bind him, because he did not desire them. He just works 
on; he works to do good, and he does good, but does not care for the result, and 
it will not come to him. But, for ordinary men, who have not attained to the 















highest state, works are of three kinds, black (evil actions), white (good 
actions), and mixed. 

ll^ll 

8. From these threefold works are manifested in each state only those desires (which are) fitting 
to that state alone. (The others are held in abeyance for the time being.) 

Suppose I have made the three kinds of Karma, good, bad, and mixed, and 
suppose I die and become a god in heaven. The desires in a god body are not 
the same as the desires in a human body; the god body neither eats nor drinks. 
What becomes of my past unworked Karmas which produce as their effect the 
desire to eat and drink? Where would these Karmas go when I become a god? 
The answer is that desires can only manifest themselves in proper 
environments. Only those desires will come out for which the environment is 
fitted; the rest will remain stored up. In this life we have many godly desires, 
many human desires, many animal desires. If I take a god body, only the good 
desires will come up, because for them the environments are suitable. And if I 
take an animal body, only the animal desires will come up, and the good 
desires will wait. What does this show? That by means of environment we can 
check these desires. Only that Karma which is suited to and fitted for the 
environments will come out. This shows that the power of environment is the 
great check to control even Karma itself. 




9. There is consecutiveness in desires, even though separated by species, space, and time, there 
being identification of memory and impressions. 

Experiences becoming hue become impressions; impressions revivified 
become memory. The word memory here includes unconscious co-ordination 
of past experiences, reduced to impressions, with present conscious action. In 
each body, the group of impressions acquired in a similar body only becomes 
the cause of action in that body. The experiences of a dissimilar body are held 
in abeyance. Each body acts as if it were a descendant of a series of bodies of 
that species only; thus, consecutiveness of desires is not to be broken. 














10. Thirst for happiness being eternal, desires are without beginning. 

All experience is preceded by desire for happiness. There was no beginning of 
experience, as each fresh experience is built upon the tendency generated by 
past experience; therefore desire is without beginning. 

11. Being held together by cause, effect, support, and objects, in the absence of these is its 
absence. 

Desires are held together by cause and effect; (The causes are the "pain-bearing 
obstructions" (II. 3) and actions (IV. 7) , and the effects are "species, life, and experience of 

pleasure and pain" (II. 13) . — Ed.) if a desire has been raised, it does not die without 
producing its effect. Then, again, the mind-stuff is the great storehouse, the 
support of all past desires reduced to Samskara form; until they have worked 
themselves out, they will not die. Moreover, so long as the senses receive the 
external objects, fresh desires will arise. If it be possible to get rid of the cause, 
effect, support, and objects of desire, then alone it will vanish. 




12. The past and future exist in their own nature, qualities having different ways. 

The idea is that existence never comes out of nonexistence. The past and 
future, though not existing in a manifested form, yet exist in a fine form. 




13. They are manifested or fine, being of the nature of the Gunas. 

The Gunas are the three substances, Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, whose gross 
state is the sensible universe. Past and future arise from the different modes of 
manifestation of these Gunas. 

II78II 
























14. The unity in things is from the unity in changes. 


Though there are three substances, their changes being co-ordinated, all objects 
have their unity. 

15. Since perception and desire vary with regard to the same object, mind and object are of 
different nature. 

That is, there is an objective world independent of our minds. This is a 
refutation of Buddhistic Idealism. Since different people look at the same thing 
differently, it cannot be a mere imagination of any particular individual. 

(There is an additional aphorism here in some editions: 




"The object cannot be said to be dependent on a single mind. There being no proof of its 
existence, it would then become nonexistent." 

If the perception of an object were the only criterion of its existence, then when the mind is 
absorbed in anything or is in Samadhi, it would not be perceived by anybody and might as well 
be said to be non-existent. This is an undesirable conclusion. — Ed.) 

d^4dJ||i^talf%5154 ^ ^IldMId’K.ll^eil 

16. Things are known on unknown to the mind, being dependent on the colouring which they 
give to the mind. 

17. The states of the mind are always known, because the lord of the mind, the Purusha, is 
unchangeable. 

The whole gist of this theory is that the universe is both mental and material. 
Both of these are in a continuous state of flux. What is this book? It is a 
combination of molecules in constant change. One lot is going out, and another 
















coming in; it is a whirlpool, but what makes the unity? What makes it the same 
book? The changes are rhythmical; in harmonious order they are sending 
impressions to my mind, and these pieced together make a continuous picture, 
although the parts are continuously changing. Mind itself is continuously 
changing. The mind and body are like two layers in the same substance, 
moving at different rates of speed. Relatively, one being slower and the other 
quicker, we can distinguish between the two motions. For instance, a train is in 
motion, and a carriage is moving alongside it. It is possible to find the motion 
of both these to a certain extent. But still something else is necessary. Motion 
can only be perceived when there is something else which is not moving. But 
when two or three things are relatively moving, we first perceive the motion of 
the faster one, and then that of the slower ones. How is the mind to perceive? It 
is also in a flux. Therefore another thing is necessary which moves more 
slowly, then you must get to something in which the motion is still slower, and 
so on, and you will find no end. Therefore logic compels you to stop 
somewhere. You must complete the series by knowing something which never 
changes. Behind this never-ending chain of motion is the Purusha, the 
changeless, the colourless, the pure. All these impressions are merely reflected 
upon it, as a magic lantern throws images upon a screen, without in any way 
tarnishing it. 




18. The mind is not self-luminous, being an object. 

Tremendous power is manifested everywhere in nature, but it is not self- 
luminous, not essentially intelligent. The Purusha alone is self-luminous, and 
gives its light to everything. It is the power of the Purusha that is percolating 
through all matter and force. 

19. From its being unable to cognise both at the, same time. 

If the mind were self-luminous it would be able to cognise itself and its objects 
at the same time, which it cannot. When it cognises the object, it cannot reflect 
on itself. Therefore the Purusha is self-luminous, and the mind is not. 









20. Another cognising mind being assumed, there will be no end to such assumptions, and 
confusion of memory will be the result. 

Let us suppose there is another mind which cognises the ordinary mind, then 
there will have to be still another to cognise the former, and so there will be no 
end to it. It will result in confusion of memory, there will be no storehouse of 
memory. 

\Rm 

21. The essence of knowledge (the Purusha) being unchangeable, when the mind takes its form, 
it becomes conscious. 

Patanjali says this to make it more clear that knowledge is not a quality of the 
Purusha. When the mind comes near the Purusha it is reflected, as it were, upon 
the mind, and the mind, for the time being, becomes knowing and seems as if it 
were itself the Purusha. 

22. Coloured by the seer and the seen the mind is able to understand everything. 

On one side of the mind the external world, the seen, is being reflected, and on 
the other, the seer is being reflected. Thus comes the power of all knowledge to 
the mind. 

23. The mind, though variegated by innumerable desires, acts for another (the Purusha), 
because it acts in combination. 

The mind is a compound of various things and therefore it cannot work for 
itself. Everything that is a combination in this world has some object for that 
combination some third thing for which this combination is going on. So this 
combination of the mind is for the Purusha. 














II3811 

24. For the discriminating, the perception of the mind as Atman ceases. 


Through discrimination the Yogi knows that the Purusha is not mind. 




25. Then bent on discriminating, the mind attains the previous state of Kaivalya (isolation). 

(There is another reading — I The meaning then would be: "Then the mind 

becomes deep in discrimination and gravitates towards Kaivalya." — Ed.) 

Thus the practice of Yoga leads to discriminating power, to clearness of vision. 
The veil drops from the eyes, and we see things as they are. We find that nature 
is a compound, and is showing the panorama for the Purusha, who is the 
witness; that nature is not the Lord, that all the combinations of nature are 
simply for the sake of showing these phenomena to the Purusha, the enthroned 
king within. When discrimination comes by long practice, fear ceases, and the 
mind attains isolation. 

dRtifef II3SII 

26. The thoughts that arise as obstructions to that are from impressions. 

All the various ideas that arise, making us believe that we require something 
external to make us happy, are obstructions to that perfection. The Purusha is 
happiness and blessedness by its own nature. But that knowledge is covered 
over by past impressions. These impressions have to work themselves out. 


113^11 


27. Their destruction is in the same manner as of ignorance, egoism, etc., as said before (II. 10) . 


113^11 


28. Even when arriving at the right discriminating knowledge of the essences, he who gives up 
the fruits, unto him comes, as the result of perfect domination, the Samadhi called the cloud of 
virtue. 






















When the Yogi has attained to this discrimination, all the powers mentioned in 
the last chapter come to him, but the true Yogi rejects them all. Unto him 
comes a peculiar knowledge, a particular light, called the Dharma-megha, the 
cloud of virtue. All the great prophets of the world whom history has recorded 
had this. They had found the whole foundation of knowledge within 
themselves. Truth to them had become real. Peace and calmness, and perfect 
purity became their own nature, after they had given up the vanities of powers. 




29. From that comes cessation of pain and works. 

When that cloud of virtue has come, then no more is there fear of falling, 
nothing can drag the Yogi down. No more will there be evils for him. No more 
pains. 

30. The knowledge, bereft of covering and impurities, becoming infinite, the knowable 
becomes small. 

Knowledge itself is there; its covering is gone. One of the Buddhistic scriptures 
defines what is meant by the Buddha (which is the name of a state) as infinite 
knowledge, infinite as the sky. Jesus attained to that and became the Christ. All 
of you will attain to that state. Knowledge becoming infinite, the knowable 
becomes small. The whole universe, with all its objects of knowledge, becomes 
as nothing before the Purusha. The ordinary man thinks himself very small, 
because to him the knowable seems to be infinite. 




31. Then are finished the successive transit formations of the qualities, they having attained the 
end. 

Then all these various transformations of the qualities, which change from 
species to species, cease for ever. 

















32. The changes that exist in relation to moments and which are perceived at the other end (at 
the end of a series) are succession. 

Patanjali here defines the word succession, the changes that exist in relation to 
moments. While I think, many moments pass, and with each moment there is a 
change of idea, but I only perceive these changes at the end of a series. This is 
called succession, but for the mind that has realised omnipresence there is no 
succession. Everything has become present for it; to it the present alone exists, 
the past and future are lost. Time stands controlled, all knowledge is there in 
one second. Everything is known like a flash. 

^TITRI 

33. The resolution in the inverse order of the qualities, bereft of any motive of action for the 
Purusha, is Kaivalya, or it is the establishment of the power of knowledge in its own nature. 

Nature's task is done, this unselfish task which our sweet nurse, nature, had 
imposed upon herself. She gently took the self-forgetting soul by the hand, as it 
were, and showed him all the experiences in the universe, all manifestations, 
bringing him higher and higher through various bodies, till his lost glory came 
back, and he remembered his own nature. Then the kind mother went back the 
same way she came, for others who also have lost their way in the trackless 
desert of life. And thus is she working, without beginning and without end. 

And thus through pleasure and pain, through good and evil, the infinite river of 
souls is flowing into the ocean of perfection, of self-realisation. 

Glory unto those who have realised their own nature. May their blessings be on 
us all! 


» 














« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Raja-Yoga / 

PATANJALI'S YOGA APHORISMS 
APPENDIX 

REFERENCES TO YOGA 
Shvetdshvatara Upanishad 

CHAPTER H 


6. Where the fire is rubbed, where the air is controlled, where the Soma flows over, there a 
(perfect) mind is created. 


ii^ii 


8. Placing the body in a straight posture, with the chest, the throat and the head held erect, 
making the organs enter the mind, the sage crosses all the fearful currents by means of the raft 
of Brahman. 

ll^ll 


9. The man of well-regulated endeavours controls the Prana; and when it has become quieted, 
breathes out through the nostrils. The persevering sage holds his mind as a charioteer holds the 
restive horses. 























I l?o|| 


10. In (lonely) places as mountain caves where the floor is even, free of pebbles, fire, or sand, 
where there are no disturbing noises from men or waterfalls, in auspicious places helpful to the 
mind and pleasing to the eyes. Yoga is to be practiced (mind is to be joined). 




11. Like snowfall, smoke, sun, wind, fire, firefly, lightning, crystal, moon, these forms, coming 
before, gradually manifest the Brahman in Yoga. 


ilBFl ^f^ll?:3ll 


12. When the perceptions of Yoga, arising from earth, water, light, fire, ether, have taken place, 
then Yoga has begun. Unto him does not come disease, nor old age, nor death, who has got a 
body made up of the fire of Yoga. 

I 

Wli ll??ll 


13. The first signs of entering Yoga are lightness, health, non-covetousness, clearness of 
complexion, a beautiful voice, an agreeable odour in the body, and scantiness of excretions. 


\m\\ 


14. As gold or silver, first covered with earth, and then cleaned, shines full of light, so the 




































embodied man seeing the truth of the Atman as one, attains the goal and becomes sorrowless. 


Yajnavalkya quoted by Shankara 

(In Svetashvatara Upanishad Bhashya.) 


WIBIR ^ ni# II 

^ II 

^ ^ I 

Hpl^: II 

II 

^^rf^^?TRfTJI TO: I 
1^11 II 

^ II 

Wi ^UR: II 

g ^1^: I 
^ f^dr^hld#^ II 
?wKi^i 

nid4wik^ m sn^ii 

?Wlfe^4 te^I: I 

dI^1^UTl& II 

SfEl-^d>dPH(^^dTi I 

mmjA d^: I 

11MNR5PTBTP1: ITMRFl: IT^tl^d: II 


+ 


+ 

















































































II 

nnf^t ^:WT ^ wm ii 
muimiTwii: i 
^#%X^T ^p^: M: II 

^ ^WI 5 TT™ I 

I 

II 

JTMRhS.J^KU lif^l^ R)(?s|c|R^ I 

II 

"After practicing the postures as desired, according to rules, then, O Gargi, the man who has 
conquered the posture will practice Pranayama. 

"Seated in an easy posture, on a (deer or tiger) skin, placed on Kusha grass, worshipping 
Ganapati with fruits and sweetmeats, placing the right palm on the left, holding the throat and 
head in the same line, the lips closed and firm, facing the east or the north, the eyes fixed on the 
tip of the nose, avoiding too much food or fasting, the NMis should be purified, without which 
the practice will be fruitless. Thinking of the (seed-word) "Hum," at the junction of Pingala and 
Ida (the right and the left nostrils), the Ida should be filled with external air in twelve Matras 
(seconds); then the Yogi meditates on fire in the same place with the word "Rung," and while 
meditating thus, slowly ejects the air through the Pingala (right nostril). Again filling in 
through the Pingala the air should be slowly ejected through the Ida, in the same way. This 
should be practiced for three or four years, or three or four months, according to the directions 
of a Guru, in secret (alone in a room), in the early morning, at midday, in the evening, and at 
midnight (until) the nerves become purified. Lightness of body, clear complexion, good 
appetite, hearing of the NMa, are the signs of the purification of nerves. Then should be 
practiced Pranayama composed of Rechaka (exhalation), Kumbhaka (retention), and Puraka 
(inhalation). Joining the Prana with the Apana is Pranayama. 

"In sixteen Matras filling the body from the head to the feet, in thirty-two Matras the Prana is to 
be thrown out, and with sixty-four the Kumbhaka should be made. 

"There is another Pranayama in which the Kumbhaka should first be made with sixty-four 
Matras, then the Prana should be thrown out with sixteen, and the body next filled with sixteen 
Matras. 

"By Pranayama impurities of the body are thrown out; by Dharana the impurities of the mind; 
by Pratyahara impurities of attachment; and by Samadhi is taken off everything that hides the 
lordship of the Soul." 


































Sdnkhya 


BOOK III 




29. By the achievement of meditation, there come to the pure one (the Purusha) all powers of 
nature. 




30. Meditation is the removal of attachment. 




31. It is perfected by the suppression of the modifications. 


32. By Dharana, posture, and performance of one's duties, it is perfected. 




33. Restraint of the Prana is by means of expulsion and retention. 


34. Posture is that which is steady and easy. 

36. Also by non-attachment and practice, meditation is perfected. 




74. By reflection on the principles of nature, and by giving them up as "not It, not It" 
discrimination is Pingala. 






























BOOK IV 




3. Instruction is to be repeated. 

11^11 

5. As the hawk becomes unhappy if the food is taken away from him and happy if he gives it 
up himself (so he who gives up everything voluntarily is happy). 




6. As the snake is happy in giving up his old skin. 


sigivRT^to?' ii^ii 


8. That which is not a means of liberation is not to be thought of; it becomes a cause of 
bondage, as in the case of Bharata. 




9. From the association of many things there is obstruction to meditation, through passion, 
aversion, etc., like the shell bracelets on the virgin's hand. 

ll?o|| 

10. It is the same even in the case of two. 

^ m\\ 

11. The renouncers of hope are happy, like the girl Pingala. 




13. Although devotion is to be given to many institutes and teachers, the essence is to be taken 






























from them all as the bee takes the essence from many flowers. 




14. One whose mind has become concentrated like the arrowmaker's does not get his 
meditation disturbed. 

15. Through transgression of the original rules there is non-attainment of the goal, as in other 
worldly things. 




19. By continence, reverence, and devotion to Guru, success comes after a long time (as in the 
case of Indra). 


4 


20. There is no law as to time, as in the case of Vamadeva. 




24. Or through association with one who has attained perfection. 


4 


27. Not by enjoyments is desire appeased even with sages (who have practiced Yoga for long). 


BOOKV 




128. The Siddhis attained by Yoga are not to be denied like recovery through medicines etc. 


BOOK VI 









































^ f^: II^^11 


/V 

24. Any posture which is easy and steady is an Asana; there is no other rule. 


Vydsa-Sutras 

CHAPTER IV, SECTION I 


5n#R: TO^II^II 


7. Worship is possible in a sitting posture. 


11^11 


8. Because of meditation. 


ll^ll 


9. Because the meditating (person) is compared to the immovable earth. 


^ m\ 


10. Also because the Smritis say so. 




11. There is no law of place; wherever the mind is concentrated, there worship should be 
performed. 

These several extracts give an idea of what other systems of Indian Philosophy 
have to say upon Yoga. 


» 















Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 1 

Lectures and Discourses 

Soul, God and Religion 

The Hindu Religion 

What is Religion? 

Vedic Religious Ideals 

The Vedanta Philosophy 

Reason and Religion 

Vedanta as a Factor in Civilisation 

The Spirit and Influence of Vedanta 

Steps of Hindu Philosophic thought 

Steps to Realisation 
Vedanta and Privilege 

Privilege 

Krishna 

Gita I 
Gita II 



















Gita III 


Mohammed 
Vilvamangala 
The Soul and God 

Breathing 

Practical Religion: Breathing and Meditation 








« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


SOUL, GOD AND RELIGION 

Through the vistas of the past the voice of the centuries is coming down to us; 
the voice of the sages of the Himalayas and the recluses of the forest; the voice 
that came to the Semitic races; the voice that spoke through Buddha and other 
spiritual giants; the voice that comes from those who live in the light that 
accompanied man in the beginning of the earth — the light that shines 
wherever man goes and lives with him for ever — is coming to us even now. 
This voice is like the little rivulet; that come from the mountains. Now they 
disappear, and now they appear again in stronger flow till finally they unite in 
one mighty majestic flood. The messages that are coming down to us from the 
prophets and holy men and women of all sects and nations are joining their 
forces and speaking to us with the trumpet voice of the past. And the first 
message it brings us is: Peace be unto you and to all religions. It is not a 
message of antagonism, but of one united religion. 

Let us study this message first. At the beginning of this century it was almost 
feared that religion was at an end. Under the tremendous sledge-hammer blows 
of scientific research, old superstitions were crumbling away like masses of 
porcelain. Those to upon religion meant only a bundle of creeds and 
meaningless ceremonials were in despair; they were at their wit's end. 
Everything was slipping between their fingers. For a time it seemed inevitable 
that the surging tide of agnosticism and materialism would sweep all before it. 
There were those who did not dare utter what they thought. Many thought the 
case hopeless and the cause of religion lost once and for ever. But the tide has 
turned and to the rescue has come — what? The study of comparative religions 
By the study of different religions we find that in essence they are one. When I 
was a boy, this scepticism reached me, and it seemed for a time as if I must 
give up all hope of religion. But fortunately for me I studied the Christian 
religion, the Mohammedan, the Buddhistic, and others, and what was my 
surprise to find that the same foundation principles taught by my religion were 
also taught by all religions. It appealed to me this way. What is the truth? I 
asked. Is this world true? Yes. Why? Because I see it. Are the beautiful sounds 
we just heard (the vocal and instrumental music) true? Yes. Because we heard 







them. We know that man has a body, eyes, and ears, and he has a spiritual 
nature which we cannot see. And with his spiritual faculties he can study these 
different religions and find that whether a religion is taught in the forests and 
jungles of India or in a Christian land, in essentials all religions are one. This 
only shows us that religion is a constitutional necessity of the human mind. The 
proof of one religion depends on the proof of all the rest. For instance, if I have 
six fingers, and no one else has, you may well say that is abnormal. The same 
reasoning may be applied to the argument that only one religion is true and all 
others false. One religion only, like one set of six fingers in the world, would 
be unnatural. We see, therefore, that if one religion is true, all others must be 
true. There are differences in non-essentials, but in essentials they are all one. If 
my five fingers are true, they prove that your five fingers are true too. 

Wherever man is, he must develop a belief, he must develop his religious 
nature. 

And another fact I find in the study of the various religions of the world is that 
there are three different stages of ideas with regard to the soul and God. In the 
first place, all religions admit that, apart from the body which perishes, there is 
a certain part or something which does not change like the body, a part that is 
immutable, eternal, that never dies; but some of the later religions teach that 
although there is a part of us that never dies, it had a beginning. But anything 
that has a beginning must necessarily have an end. We — the essential part of 
us — never had a beginning, and will never have an end. And above us all, 
above this eternal nature, there is another eternal Being, without end — God. 
People talk about the beginning of the world, the beginning of man. The word 
beginning simply means the beginning of the cycle. It nowhere means the 
beginning of the whole Cosmos. It is impossible that creation could have a 
beginning. No one of you can imagine a time of beginning. That which has a 
beginning must have an end. "Never did I not exist, nor you, nor will any of us 
ever hereafter cease to be," says the Bhagavad-Gita. Wherever the beginning of 
creation is mentioned, it means the beginning of a cycle. Your body will meet 
with death, but your soul, never. 

Along with this idea of the soul we find another group of ideas in regard to its 
perfection. The soul in itself is perfect. The Old Testament of the Hebrews 
admits man perfect at the beginning. Man made himself impure by his own 




actions. But he is to regain his old nature, his pure nature. Some speak of these 
things in allegories, fables, and symbols. But when we begin to analyse these 
statements, we find that they all teach that the human soul is in its very nature 
perfect, and that man is to regain that original purity. How? By knowing God. 
Just as the Bible says, "No man can see God but through the Son." What is 
meant by it? That seeing God is the aim and goal of all human life. The sonship 
must come before we become one with the Father. Remember that man lost his 
purity through his own actions. When we suffer, it is because of our own acts; 
God is not to be blamed for it. 

Closely connected with these ideas is the doctrine — which was universal 
before the Europeans mutilated it — the doctrine of reincarnation. Some of you 
may have heard of and ignored it. This idea of reincarnation runs parallel with 
the other doctrine of the eternity of the human soul. Nothing which ends at one 
point can be without a beginning and nothing that begins at one point can be 
without an end. We cannot believe in such a monstrous impossibility as the 
beginning of the human soul. The doctrine of reincarnation asserts the freedom 
of the soul. Suppose there was an absolute beginning. Then the whole burden 
of this impurity in man falls upon God. The all-merciful Father responsible for 
the sins of the world! If sin comes in this way, why should one suffer more 
than another? Why such partiality, if it comes from an all-merciful God? Why 
are millions trampled underfoot? Why do people starve who never did anything 
to cause it? Who is responsible? If they had no hand in it, surely, God would be 
responsible. Therefore the better explanation is that one is responsible for the 
miseries one suffers. If I set the wheel in motion, I am responsible for the 
result. And if I can bring misery, I can also stop it. It necessarily follows that 
we are free. There is no such thing as fate. There is nothing to compel us. What 
we have done, that we can undo. 

To one argument in connection with this doctrine I will ask your patient 
attention, as it is a little intricate. We gain all our knowledge through 
experience; that is the only way. What we call experiences are on the plane of 
consciousness. For illustration: A man plays a tune on a piano, he places each 
finger on each key consciously. He repeats this process till the movement of the 
fingers becomes a habit. He then plays a tune without having to pay special 
attention to each particular key. Similarly, we find in regard to ourselves that 




our tendencies are the result of past conscious actions. A child is born with 
certain tendencies. Whence do they come? No child is born with a tabula rasa 
— with a clean, blank page — of a mind. The page has been written on 
previously. The old Greek and Egyptian philosophers taught that no child came 
with a vacant mind. Each child comes with a hundred tendencies generated by 
past conscious actions. It did not acquire these in this life, and we are bound to 
admit that it must have had them in past lives. The rankest materialist has to 
admit that these tendencies are the result of past actions, only they add that 
these tendencies come through heredity. Our parents, grandparents, and great- 
grandparents come down to us through this law of heredity. Now if heredity 
alone explains this, there is no necessity of believing in the soul at all, because 
body explains everything. We need not go into the different arguments and 
discussions on materialism and spiritualism. So far the way is clear for those 
who believe in an individual soul. We see that to come to a reasonable 
conclusion we must admit that we have had past lives. This is the belief of the 
great philosophers and sages of the past and of modern times. Such a doctrine 
was believed in among the Jews. Jesus Christ believed in it. He says in the 
Bible, "Before Abraham was, I am." And in another place it is said, "This is 
Elias who is said to have come." 

All the different religions which grew among different nations under varying 
circumstances and conditions had their origin in Asia, and the Asiatics 
understand them well. When they came out from the motherland, they got 
mixed up with errors. The most profound and noble ideas of Christianity were 
never understood in Europe, because the ideas and images used by the writers 
of the Bible were foreign to it. Take for illustration the pictures of the 
Madonna. Every artist paints his Madonna according to his own pre-conceived 
ideas. I have been seeing hundreds of pictures of the Last Supper of Jesus 
Christ, and he is made to sit at a table. Now, Christ never sat at a table; he 
squatted with others, and they had a bowl in which they dipped bread — not 
the kind of bread you eat today. It is hard for any nation to understand the 
unfamiliar customs of other people. How much more difficult was it for 
Europeans to understand the Jewish customs after centuries of changes and 
accretions from Greek, Roman, and other sources! Through all the myths and 
mythologies by which it is surrounded it is no wonder that the people get very 
little of the beautiful religion of Jesus, and no wonder that they have made of it 





a modern shop-keeping religion. 

To come to our point. We find that all religions teach the eternity of the soul, as 
well as that its lustre has been dimmed, and that its primitive purity is to be 
regained by the knowledge of God. What is the idea of God in these different 
religions? The primary idea of God was very vague. The most ancient nations 
had different Deities — sun, earth, fire, water. Among the ancient Jews we find 
numbers of these gods ferociously fighting with each other. Then we find 
Elohim whom the Jews and the Babylonians worshipped. We next find one 
God standing supreme. But the idea differed according to different tribes. They 
each asserted that their God was the greatest. And they tried to prove it by 
fighting. The one that could do the best fighting proved thereby that its God 
was the greatest. Those races were more or less savage. But gradually better 
and better ideas took the place of the old ones. All those old ideas are gone or 
going into the lumber-room. All those religions were the outgrowth of 
centuries; not one fell from the skies. Each had to be worked out bit by bit. 

Next come the monotheistic ideas: belief in one God, who is omnipotent and 
omniscient, the one God of the universe. This one God is extra-cosmic; he lies 
in the heavens. He is invested with the gross conceptions of His originators. He 
has a right side and a left side, and a bird in His hand, and so on and so forth. 
But one thing we find, that the tribal gods have disappeared for ever, and the 
one God of the universe has taken their place: the God of gods. Still He is only 
an extra-cosmic God. He is unapproachable; nothing can come near Him. But 
slowly this idea has changed also, and at the next stage we find a God 
immanent in nature. 

In the New Testament it is taught, "Our Eather who art in heaven" — God 
living in the heavens separated from men. We are living on earth and He is 
living in heaven. Eurther on we find the teaching that He is a God immanent in 
nature; He is not only God in heaven, but on earth too. He is the God in us. In 
the Hindu philosophy we find a stage of the same proximity of God to us. But 
we do not stop there. There is the non-dualistic stage, in which man realises 
that the God he has been worshipping is not only the Eather in heaven, and on 
earth, but that "I and my Eather are one." He realises in his soul that he is God 
Himself, only a lower expression of Him. All that is real in me is He; all that is 
real in Him is I. The gulf between God and man is thus bridged. Thus we find 



how, by knowing God, we find the kingdom of heaven within us. 

In the first or dualistic stage, man knows he is a little personal soul, John, 
James, or Tom; and he says, "I will be John, James, or Tom to all eternity, and 
never anything else." As well might the murderer come along and say, "I will 
remain a murderer for ever." But as time goes on, Tom vanishes and goes back 
to the original pure Adam. 

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." Can we see God? Of 
course not. Can we know God? Of course not. If God can be known. He will be 
God no longer. Knowledge is limitation. But I and my Father are one: I find the 
reality in my soul. These ideas are expressed in some religions, and in others 
only hinted. In some they were expatriated. Christ's teachings are now very 
little understood in this country. If you will excuse me, I will say that they have 
never been very well understood. 

The different stages of growth are absolutely necessary to the attainment of 
purity and perfection. The varying systems of religion are at bottom founded on 
the same ideas. Jesus says the kingdom of heaven is within you. Again he says, 
"Our father who art in Heaven." How do you reconcile the two sayings? In this 
way: He was talking to the uneducated masses when he said the latter, the 
masses who were uneducated in religion. It was necessary to speak to them in 
their own language. The masses want concrete ideas, something the senses can 
grasp. A man may be the greatest philosopher in the world, but a child in 
religion. When a man has developed a high state of spirituality he can 
understand that the kingdom of heaven is within him. That is the real kingdom 
of the mind. Thus we see that the apparent contradictions and perplexities in 
every religion mark but different stages of growth. And as such we have no 
right to blame anyone for his religion. There are stages of growth in which 
forms and symbols are necessary; they are the language that the souls in that 
stage can understand. 

The next idea that I want to bring to you is that religion does not consist in 
doctrines or dogmas. It is not what you read, nor what dogmas you believe that 
is of importance, but what you realise. "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they 
shall see God," yea, in this life. And that is salvation. There are those who 


teach that this can be gained by the mumbling of words. But no great Master 
ever taught that external forms were necessary for salvation. The power of 
attaining it is within ourselves. We live and move in God. Creeds and sects 
have their parts to play, but they are for children, they last but temporarily. 
Books never make religions, but religions make books. We must not forget 
that. No book ever created God, but God inspired all the great books. And no 
book ever created a soul. We must never forget that. The end of all religions is 
the realising of God in the soul. That is the one universal religion. If there is 
one universal truth in all religions, I place it here — in realising God. Ideals 
and methods may differ, but that is the central point. There may be a thousand 
different radii, but they all converge to the one centre, and that is the realisation 
of God: something behind this world of sense, this world of eternal eating and 
drinking and talking nonsense, this world of false shadows and selfishness. 
There is that beyond all books, beyond all creeds, beyond the vanities of this 
world and it is the realisation of God within yourself. A man may believe in all 
the churches in the world, he may carry in his head all the sacred books ever 
written, he may baptise himself in all the rivers of the earth, still, if he has no 
perception of God, I would class him with the rankest atheist. And a man may 
have never entered a church or a mosque, nor performed any ceremony, but if 
he feels God within himself and is thereby lifted above the vanities of the 
world, that man is a holy man, a saint, call him what you will. As soon as a 
man stands up and says he is right or his church is right, and all others are 
wrong, he is himself all wrong. He does not know that upon the proof of all the 
others depends the proof of his own. Love and charity for the whole human 
race, that is the test of true religiousness. I do not mean the sentimental 
statement that all men are brothers, but that one must feel the oneness of human 
life. So far as they are not exclusive, I see that the sects and creeds are all mine; 
they are all grand. They are all helping men towards the real religion. I will 
add, it is good to be born in a church, but it is bad to die there. It is good to be 
born a child, but bad to remain a child. Churches, ceremonies, and symbols are 
good for children, but when the child is grown, he must burst the church or 
himself. We must not remain children for ever. It is like trying to fit one coat to 
all sizes and growths. I do not deprecate the existence of sects in the world. 
Would to God there were twenty millions more, for the more there are, there 
will be a greater field for selection. What I do object to is trying to fit one 
religion to every case. Though all religions are essentially the same, they must 




have the varieties of form produced by dissimilar circumstances among 
different nations. We must each have our own individual religion, individual so 
far as the externals of it go. 

Many years ago, I visited a great sage of our own country, a very holy man. We 
talked of our revealed book, the Vedas, of your Bible, of the Koran, and of 
revealed books in general. At the close of our talk, this good man asked me to 
go to the table and take up a book; it was a book which, among other things, 
contained a forecast of the rainfall during the year. The sage said, "Read that." 
And I read out the quantity of rain that was to fall. He said, "Now take the book 
and squeeze it." I did so and he said, "Why, my boy, not a drop of water comes 
out. Until the water comes out, it is all book, book. So until your religion 
makes you realise God, it is useless. He who only studies books for religion 
reminds one of the fable of the ass which carried a heavy load of sugar on its 
back, but did not know the sweetness of it." 

Shall we advise men to kneel down and cry, "O miserable sinners that we are!" 
No, rather let us remind them of their divine nature. I will tell you a story. A 
lioness in search of prey came upon a flock of sheep, and as she jumped at one 
of them, she gave birth to a cub and died on the spot. The young lion was 
brought up in the flock, ate grass, and bleated like a sheep, and it never knew 
that it was a lion. One day a lion came across the flock and was astonished to 
see in it a huge lion eating grass and bleating like a sheep. At his sight the flock 
fled and the lion-sheep with them. But the lion watched his opportunity and one 
day found the lion-sheep asleep. He woke him up and said, "You are a lion." 
The other said, "No," and began to bleat like a sheep. But the stranger lion took 
him to a lake and asked him to look in the water at his own image and see if it 
did not resemble him, the stranger lion. He looked and acknowledged that it 
did. Then the stranger lion began to roar and asked him to do the same. The 
lion-sheep tried his voice and was soon roaring as grandly as the other. And he 
was a sheep no longer. 

My friends, I would like to tell you all that you are mighty as lions. 

If the room is dark, do you go about beating your chest and crying, "It is dark, 
dark, dark!" No, the only way to get the light is to strike a light, and then the 


darkness goes. The only way to realise the light above you is to strike the 
spiritual light within you, and the darkness of sin and impurity will flee away. 
Think of your higher self, not of your lower. 

^ ^ ^ 

Some questions and answers here followed. 

Q. A man in the audience said, "If ministers stop preaching hell-fire, they will 
have no control over their people." 

A. They had better lose it then. The man who is frightened into religion has no 
religion at all. Better teach him of his divine nature than of his animal. 

Q. What did the Lord mean when he said, "The kingdom of heaven is not of 
this world?" 

A. That the kingdom of heaven is within us. The Jewish idea was a kingdom of 
heaven upon this earth. That was not the idea of Jesus. 

Q. Do you believe we come up from the animals? 

A. I believe that, by the law of evolution, the higher beings have come up from 
the lower kingdoms. 

Q. Do you know of anyone who remembers his previous life ? 

A. I have met some who told me they did remember their previous life. They 
had reached a point where they could remember their former incarnations. 

Q. Do you believe in Christ's crucifixion? 

A. Christ was God incarnate; they could not kill him. That which was crucified 
was only a semblance, a mirage. 

Q. If he could have produced such a semblance as that, would not that have 
been the greatest miracle of all? 


A. I look upon miracles as the greatest stumbling-blocks in the way of truth. 
When the disciples of Buddha told him of a man who had performed a so- 
called miracle — had taken a bowl from a great height without touching it — 
and showed him the bowl, he took it and crushed it under his feet and told them 
never to build their faith on miracles, but to look for truth in everlasting 
principles. He taught them the true inner light — the light of the spirit, which is 
the only safe light to go by. Miracles are only stumbling-blocks. Let us brush 
them aside. 

Q. Do you believe Jesus preached the Sermon on the Mount? 

A. I do believe he did. But in this matter I have to go by the books as others do, 
and I am aware that mere book testimony is rather shaky ground. But we are all 
safe in taking the teachings of the Sermon on the Mount as a guide. We have to 
take what appeals to our inner spirit. Buddha taught five hundred years before 
Christ, and his words were full of blessings: never a curse came from his lips, 
nor from his life; never one from Zoroaster, nor from Confucius. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE HINDU RELIGION 

My religion is to learn. I read my Bible better in the light of your Bible and the 
dark prophecies of my religion become brighter when compared with those of 
your prophets. Truth has always been universal. If I alone were to have six 
fingers on my hand while all of you had only five, you would not think that my 
hand was the true intent of nature, but rather that it was abnormal and diseased. 
Just so with religion. If one creed alone were to be true and all the others 
untrue, you would have a right to say that that religion was diseased; if one 
religion is true, all the others must be true. Thus the Hindu religion is your 
property as well as mine. Of the two hundred and ninety millions of people 
inhabiting India, only two millions are Christians, sixty millions 
Mohammedans and all the rest are Hindus. 

The Hindus found their creed upon the ancient Vedas, a word derived from 
Vid, "to know". These are a series of books which, to our minds, contain the 
essence of all religion; but we do not think they alone contain the truths. They 
teach us the immortality of the soul. In every country and every human breast 
there is a natural desire to find a stable equilibrium — something that does not 
change. We cannot find it in nature, for all the universe is nothing but an 
infinite mass of changes. But to infer from that that nothing unchanging exists 
is to fall into the error of the Southern school of Buddhists and the Charvakas, 
which latter believe that all is matter and nothing mind, that all religion is a 
cheat, and morality and goodness, useless superstitions. The Vedanta 
philosophy teaches that man is not bound by his five senses. They only know 
the present, and neither the future nor the past; but as the present signifies both 
past and future, and all three are only demarcations of time, the present also 
would be unknown if it were not for something above the senses, something 
independent of time, which unifies the past and the future in the present. 

But what is independent? Not our body, for it depends upon outward 
conditions; nor our mind, because the thoughts of which it is composed are 
caused. It is our soul. The Vedas say the whole world is a mixture of 
independence and dependence, of freedom and slavery, but through it all shines 






the soul independent, immortal, pure, perfect, holy. For if it is independent, it 
cannot perish, as death is but a change, and depends upon conditions; if 
independent, it must be perfect, for imperfection is again but a condition, and 
therefore dependent. And this immortal and perfect soul must be the same in 
the highest God as well as in the humblest man, the difference between them 
being only in the degree in which this soul manifests itself. 

But why should the soul take to itself a body? For the same reason that I take a 
looking-glass — to see myself. Thus, in the body, the soul is reflected. The soul 
is God, and every human being has a perfect divinity within himself, and each 
one must show his divinity sooner or later. If I am in a dark room, no amount 
of protestation will make it any brighter — I must light a match. Just so, no 
amount of grumbling and wailing will make our imperfect body more perfect. 
But the Vedanta teaches — call forth your soul, show your divinity. Teach your 
children that they are divine, that religion is a positive something and not a 
negative nonsense; that it is not subjection to groans when under oppression, 
but expansion and manifestation. 

Every religion has it that man's present and future are modified by the past, and 
that the present is but the effect of the past. How is it, then, that every child is 
born with an experience that cannot be accounted for by hereditary 
transmission? How is it that one is born of good parents, receives a good 
education and becomes a good man, while another comes from besotted parents 
and ends on the gallows? How do you explain this inequality without 
implicating God? Why should a merciful Father set His child in such 
conditions which must bring forth misery? It is no explanation to say God will 
make amends; later on — God has no blood-money. Then, too, what becomes 
of my liberty, if this be my first birth? Coming into this world without the 
experience of a former life, my independence would be gone, for my path 
would be marked out by the experience of others. If I cannot be the maker of 
my own fortune, then I am not free. I take upon myself the blame for the 
misery of this existence, and say I will unmake the evil I have done in another 
existence. This, then, is our philosophy of the migration of the soul. We come 
into this life with the experience of another, and the fortune or misfortune of 
this existence is the result of our acts in a former existence, always becoming 
better, till at last perfection is reached. 




We believe in a God, the Father of the universe, infinite and omnipotent. But if 
our soul at last becomes perfect, it also must become infinite. But there is no 
room for two infinite unconditional beings, and hence we believe in a Personal 
God, and we ourselves are He. These are the three stages which every religion 
has taken. First we see God in the far beyond, then we come nearer to Him and 
give Him omnipresence so that we live in Him; and at last we recognise that we 
are He. The idea of an Objective God is not untrue — in fact, every idea of 
God, and hence every religion, is true, as each is but a different stage in the 
journey, the aim of which is the perfect conception of the Vedas. Hence, too, 
we not only tolerate, but we Hindus accept every religion, praying in the 
mosque of the Mohammedans, worshipping before the fire of the Zoroastrians, 
and kneeling before the cross of the Christians, knowing that all the religions, 
from the lowest fetishism to the highest absolutism, mean so many attempts of 
the human soul to grasp and realise the infinite, each determined by the 
conditions of its birth and association, and each of them marking a stage of 
progress. We gather all these flowers and bind them with the twine of love, 
making a wonderful bouquet of worship. 

If I am God, then my soul is a temple of the Highest, and my every motion 
should be a worship — love for love's sake, duty for duty's sake, without hope 
of reward or fear of punishment. Thus my religion means expansion, and 
expansion means realisation and perception in the highest sense — no 
mumbling words or genuflections. Man is to become divine, realising the 
divine more and more from day to day in an endless progress. 

(Summary of a lecture delivered before the Ethical Society, Brooklyn, at the. Pouch Gallery in 
Clinton Avenue, on the 30th December, 1894. Reproduced from the Brooklyn Standard 
Union.) 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


WHAT IS RELIGION? 

A huge locomotive has rushed on over the line and a small worm that was 
creeping upon one of the rails saved its life by crawling out of the path of the 
locomotive. Yet this little worm, so insignificant that it can be crushed in a 
moment, is a living something, while this locomotive, so huge, so immense, is 
only an engine, a machine. You say the one has life and the other is only dead 
matter and all its powers and strength and speed are only those of a dead 
machine, a mechanical contrivance. Yet the poor little worm which moved 
upon the rail and which the least touch of the engine would have deprived of its 
life is a majestic being compared to that huge locomotive. It is a small part of 
the Infinite and, therefore, it is greater than this powerful engine. Why should 
that be so? How do we know the living from the dead? The machine 
mechanically performs all the movements its maker made it to perform, its 
movements are not those of life. How can we make the distinction between the 
living and the dead, then? In the living there is freedom, there is intelligence; in 
the dead all is bound and no freedom is possible, because there is no 
intelligence. This freedom that distinguishes us from mere machines is what we 
are all striving for. To be more free is the goal of all our efforts, for only in 
perfect freedom can there be perfection. This effort to attain freedom underlies 
all forms of worship, whether we know it or not. 

If we were to examine the various sorts of worship all over the world, we 
would see that the rudest of mankind are worshipping ghosts, demons, and the 
spirits of their forefathers — serpent worship, worship of tribal gods, and 
worship of the departed ones. Why do they do this? Because they feel that in 
some unknown way these beings are greater, more powerful than themselves, 
and limit their freedom. They, therefore, seek to propitiate these beings in order 
to prevent them from molesting them, in other words, to get more freedom. 
They also seek to win favour from these superior beings, to get by gift of the 
gods what ought to be earned by personal effort. 

On the whole, this shows that the world is expecting a miracle. This 
expectation never leaves us, and however we may try, we are all running after 






the miraculous and extraordinary. What is mind but that ceaseless inquiry into 
the meaning and mystery of life? We may say that only uncultivated people are 
going after all these things, but the question still is there: Why should it be so? 
The Jews were asking for a miracle. The whole world has been asking for the 
same these thousands of years. There is, again, the universal dissatisfaction. 

We make an ideal but we have rushed only half the way after it when we make 
a newer one. We struggle hard to attain to some goal and then discover we do 
not want it. This dissatisfaction we are having time after time, and what is there 
in the mind if there is to be only dissatisfaction? What is the meaning of this 
universal dissatisfaction? It is because freedom is every man's goal. He seeks it 
ever, his whole life is a struggle after it. The child rebels against law as soon as 
it is born. Its first utterance is a cry, a protest against the bondage in which it 
finds itself. This longing for freedom produces the idea of a Being who is 
absolutely free. The concept of God is a fundamental element in the human 
constitution. In the Vedanta, Sat-chit-ananda (Existence-Knowledge-Bliss) is 
the highest concept of God possible to the mind. It is the essence of knowledge 
and is by its nature the essence of bliss. We have been stifling that inner voice 
long enough, seeking to follow law and quiet the human nature, but there is that 
human instinct to rebel against nature's laws. We may not understand what the 
meaning is, but there is that unconscious struggle of the human with the 
spiritual, of the lower with the higher mind, and the struggle attempts to 
preserve one's separate life, what we call our "individuality". 

Even hells stand out with this miraculous fact that we are born rebels; and the 
first fact of life — the inrushing of life itself — against this we rebel and cry 
out, "No law for us." As long as we obey the laws we are like machines, and on 
goes the universe, and we cannot break it. Laws as laws become man's nature. 
The first inkling of life on its higher level is in seeing this struggle within us to 
break the bond of nature and to be free. "Ereedom, O Ereedom! Ereedom, O 
Ereedom!" is the song of the soul. Bondage, alas, to be bound in nature, seems 
its fate. 

Why should there be serpent, or ghost, or demon worship and all these various 
creeds and forms for having miracles? Why do we say that there is life, there is 
being in anything? There must be a meaning in all this search, this endeavour 
to understand life, to explain being. It is not meaningless and vain. It is man's 




ceaseless endeavour to become free. The knowledge which we now call science 
has been struggling for thousands of years in its attempt to gain freedom, and 
people ask for freedom. Yet there is no freedom in nature. It is all law. Still the 
struggle goes on. Nay, the whole of nature from the very sun to the atoms is 
under law, and even for man there is no freedom. But we cannot believe it. We 
have been studying laws from the beginning and yet cannot — nay, will not — 
believe that man is under law. The soul cries ever, "Freedom, O Freedom!" 
With the conception of God as a perfectly free Being, man cannot rest eternally 
in this bondage. Higher he must go, and unless the struggle were for himself, 
he would think it too severe. Man says to himself, "I am a bom slave, I am 
bound; nevertheless, there is a Being who is not bound by nature. He is free 
and Master of nature." 

The conception of God, therefore, is as essential and as fundamental a part of 
mind as is the idea of bondage. Both are the outcome of the idea of freedom. 
There cannot be life, even in the plant, without the idea of freedom. In the plant 
or in the worm, life has to rise to the individual concept. It is there, 
unconsciously working, the plant living its life to preserve the variety, 
principle, or form, not nature. The idea of nature controlling every step onward 
overrules the idea of freedom. Onward goes the idea of the material world, 
onward moves the idea of freedom. Still the fight goes on. We are hearing 
about all the quarrels of creeds and sects, yet creeds and sects are just and 
proper, they must be there. The chain is lengthening and naturally the struggle 
increases, but there need be no quarrels if we only knew that we are all striving 
to reach the same goal. 

The embodiment of freedom, the Master of nature, is what we call God. You 
cannot deny Him. No, because you cannot move or live without the idea of 
freedom. Would you come here if you did not believe you were free? It is quite 
possible that the biologist can and will give some explanation of this perpetual 
effort to be free. Take all that for granted, still the idea of freedom is there. It is 
a fact, as much so as the other fact that you cannot apparently get over, the fact 
of being under nature. 

Bondage and liberty, light and shadow, good and evil must be there, but the 
very fact of the bondage shows also this freedom hidden there. If one is a fact. 


the other is equally a fact. There must be this idea of freedom. While now we 
cannot see that this idea of bondage, in uncultivated man, is his struggle for 
freedom, yet the idea of freedom is there. The bondage of sin and impurity in 
the uncultivated savage is to his consciousness very small, for his nature is only 
a little higher than the animal's. What he struggles against is the bondage of 
physical nature, the lack of physical gratification, but out of this lower 
consciousness grows and broadens the higher conception of a mental or moral 
bondage and a longing for spiritual freedom. Here we see the divine dimly 
shining through the veil of ignorance. The veil is very dense at first and the 
light may be almost obscured, but it is there, ever pure and undimmed — the 
radiant fire of freedom and perfection. Man personifies this as the Ruler of the 
Universe, the One Free Being. He does not yet know that the universe is all 
one, that the difference is only in degree, in the concept. 

The whole of nature is worship of God. Wherever there is life, there is this 
search for freedom and that freedom is the same as God. Necessarily this 
freedom gives us mastery over all nature and is impossible without knowledge. 
The more we are knowing, the more we are becoming masters of nature. 
Mastery alone is making us strong and if there be some being entirely free and 
master of nature, that being must have a perfect knowledge of nature, must be 
omnipresent and omniscient. Freedom must go hand in hand with these, and 
that being alone who has acquired these will be beyond nature. 

Blessedness, eternal peace, arising from perfect freedom, is the highest concept 
of religion underlying all the ideas of God in Vedanta — absolutely free 
Existence, not bound by anything, no change, no nature, nothing that can 
produce a change in Him. This same freedom is in you and in me and is the 
only real freedom. 

God is still, established upon His own majestic changeless Self. You and I try 
to be one with Him, but plant ourselves upon nature, upon the trifles of daily 
life, on money, on fame, on human love, and all these changing forms in nature 
which make for bondage. When nature shines, upon what depends the shining? 
Upon God and not upon the sun, nor the moon, nor the stars. Wherever 
anything shines, whether it is the light in the sun or in our own consciousness, 
it is He. He shining, all shines after Him. 



Now we have seen that this God is self-evident, impersonal, omniscient, the 
Knower and Master of nature, the Lord of all. He is behind all worship and it is 
being done according to Him, whether we know it or not. I go one step further. 
That at which all marvel, that which we call evil, is His worship too. This too is 
a part of freedom. Nay, I will be terrible even and tell you that, when you are 
doing evil, the impulse behind is also that freedom. It may have been 
misguided and misled, but it was there; and there cannot be any life or any 
impulse unless that freedom be behind it. Freedom breathes in the throb of the 
universe. Unless there is unity at the universal heart, we cannot understand 
variety. Such is the conception of the Lord in the Upanishads. Sometimes it 
rises even higher, presenting to us an ideal before which at first we stand aghast 
— that we are in essence one with God. He who is the colouring in the wings 
of the butterfly, and the blossoming of the rose-bud, is the power that is in the 
plant and in the butterfly. He who gives us life is the power within us. Out of 
His fire comes life, and the direst death is also His power. He whose shadow is 
death. His shadow is immortality also. Take a still higher conception. See how 
we are flying like hunted hares from all that is terrible, and like them, hiding 
our heads and thinking we are safe. See how the whole world is flying from 
everything terrible. Once when I was in Varanasi, I was passing through a 
place where there was a large tank of water on one side and a high wall on the 
other. It was in the grounds where there were many monkeys. The monkeys of 
Varanasi are huge brutes and are sometimes surly. They now took it into their 
heads not to allow me to pass through their street, so they howled and shrieked 
and clutched at my feet as I passed. As they pressed closer, I began to run, but 
the faster I ran, the faster came the monkeys and they began to bite at me. It 
seemed impossible to escape, but just then I met a stranger who called out to 
me, "Face the brutes." I turned and faced the monkeys, and they fell back and 
finally fled. That is a lesson for all life — face the terrible, face it boldly. Like 
the monkeys, the hardships of life fall back when we cease to flee before them. 
If we are ever to gain freedom, it must be by conquering nature, never by 
running away. Cowards never win victories. We have to fight fear and troubles 
and ignorance if we expect them to flee before us. 

What is death? What are terrors? Do you not see the Lord's face in them? Fly 
from evil and terror and misery, and they will follow you. Face them, and they 




will flee. The whole world worships ease and pleasure, and very few dare to 
worship that which is painful. To rise above both is the idea of freedom. Unless 
man passes through this gate he cannot be free. We all have to face these. We 
strive to worship the Lord, but the body rises between, nature rises between 
Him and us and blinds our vision. We must learn how to worship and love Him 
in the thunderbolt, in shame, in sorrow, in sin. All the world has ever been 
preaching the God of virtue. I preach a God of virtue and a God of sin in one. 
Take Him if you dare — that is the one way to salvation; then alone will come 
to us the Truth Ultimate which comes from the idea of oneness. Then will be 
lost the idea that one is greater than another. The nearer we approach the law of 
freedom, the more we shall come under the Lord, and troubles will vanish. 

Then we shall not differentiate the door of hell from the gate of heaven, nor 
differentiate between men and say, "I am greater than any being in the 
universe." Until we see nothing in the world but the Lord Himself, all these 
evils will beset us and we shall make all these distinctions; because it is only in 
the Lord, in the Spirit, that we are all one; and until we see God everywhere, 
this unity will not exist for us. 

Two birds of beautiful plumage, inseparable companions, sat upon the same 
tree, one on the top and one below. The beautiful bird below was eating the 
fruits of the tree, sweet and bitter, one moment a sweet one and another a bitter. 
The moment he ate a bitter fruit, he was sorry, but after a while he ate another 
and when it too was bitter, he looked up and saw the other bird who ate neither 
the sweet nor the bitter, but was calm and majestic, immersed in his own glory. 
And then the poor lower bird forgot and went on eating the sweet and bitter 
fruits again, until at last he ate one that was extremely bitter; and then he 
stopped again and once more looked up at the glorious bird above. Then he 
came nearer and nearer to the other bird; and when he had come near enough, 
rays of light shone upon him and enveloped him, and he saw he was 
transformed into the higher bird. He became calm, majestic, free, and found 
that there had been but one bird all the time on the tree. The lower bird was but 
the reflection of the one above. So we are in reality one with the Lord, but the 
reflection makes us seem many, as when the one sun reflects in a million dew- 
drops and seems a million tiny suns. The reflection must vanish if we are to 
identify ourselves with our real nature which is divine. The universe itself can 
never be the limit of our satisfaction. That is why the miser gathers more and 


more money, that is why the robber robs, the sinner sins, that is why you are 
learning philosophy. All have one purpose. There is no other purpose in life, 
save to reach this freedom. Consciously or unconsciously, we are all striving 
for perfection. Every being must attain to it. 

The man who is groping through sin, through misery, the man who is choosing 
the path through hells, will reach it, but it will take time. We cannot save him. 
Some hard knocks on his head will help him to turn to the Lord. The path of 
virtue, purity, unselfishness, spirituality, becomes known at last and what all 
are doing unconsciously, we are trying to do consciously. The idea is expressed 
by St. Paul, "The God that ye ignorantly worship. Him declare I unto you." 

This is the lesson for the whole world to learn. What have these philosophies 
and theories of nature to do, if not to help us to attain to this one goal in life? 
Let us come to that consciousness of the identity of everything and let man see 
himself in everything. Let us be no more the worshippers of creeds or sects 
with small limited notions of God, but see Him in everything in the universe. If 
you are knowers of God, you will everywhere find the same worship as in your 
own heart. 

Get rid, in the first place, of all these limited ideas and see God in every person 
— working through all hands, walking through all feet, and eating through 
every mouth. In every being He lives, through all minds He thinks. He is self- 
evident, nearer unto us than ourselves. To know this is religion, is faith, and 
may it please the Lord to give us this faith! When we shall feel that oneness, 
we shall be immortal. We are physically immortal even, one with the universe. 
So long as there is one that breathes throughout the universe, I live in that one. 

I am not this limited little being, I am the universal. I am the life of all the sons 
of the past. I am the soul of Buddha, of Jesus, of Mohammed. I am the soul of 
the teachers, and I am all the robbers that robbed, and all the murderers that 
were hanged, I am the universal. Stand up then; this is the highest worship. 

You are one with the universe. That only is humility — not crawling upon all 
fours and calling yourself a sinner. That is the highest evolution when this veil 
of differentiation is torn off. The highest creed is Oneness. I am so-and-so is a 
limited idea, not true of the real "I". I am the universal; stand upon that and 
ever worship the Highest through the highest form, for God is Spirit and should 
be worshipped in spirit and in truth. Through lower forms of worship, man's 




material thoughts rise to spiritual worship and the Universal Infinite One is at 
last worshipped in and through the spirit. That which is limited is material. The 
Spirit alone is infinite. God is Spirit, is infinite; man is Spirit and, therefore, 
infinite, and the Infinite alone can worship the Infinite. We will worship the 
Infinite; that is the highest spiritual worship. The grandeur of realising these 
ideas, how difficult it is! I theorise, talk, philosophize; and the next moment 
something comes against me, and I unconsciously become angry, I forget there 
is anything in the universe but this little limited self, I forget to say, "I am the 
Spirit, what is this trifle to me? I am the Spirit." I forget it is all myself playing, 
I forget God, I forget freedom. 

Sharp as the blade of a razor, long and difficult and hard to cross, is the way to 
freedom. The sages have declared this again and again. Yet do not let these 
weaknesses and failures bind you. The Upanishads have declared, "Arise ! 
Awake ! and stop not until the goal is reached." We will then certainly cross 
the path, sharp as it is like the razor, and long and distant and difficult though it 
be. Man becomes the master 6f gods and demons. No one is to blame for our 
miseries jut ourselves. Do you think there is only a dark cup of prison if man 
goes to look for nectar? The nectar is these and is for every man who strives to 
reach it. The Lord Himself tells us, "Give up all these paths and struggles. Do 
thou take refuge in Me. I will take thee to the other shore, be not afraid." We 
hear that from all the scriptures of the world that come to us. The same voice 
teaches Us to say, "Thy will be done upon earth, as it is in heaven," for "Thine 
is the kingdom and the power and the glory." It is difficult, all very difficult. I 
say to myself, "This moment I will take refuge in Thee, O Lord. Unto Thy love 
I will sacrifice all, and on Thine altar I will place all that is good and virtuous. 
My sins, my sorrows, my actions, good and evil, I will offer unto Thee; do 
Thou take them and I will never forget." One moment I say, "Thy will be 
done," and the next moment something comes to try me and I spring up in a 
rage. The goal of all religions is the same, but the language of the teachers 
differs. The attempt is to kill the false "I", so that the real "I", the Lord, will 
reign. "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God. Thou shalt have no other gods 
before me," say the Hebrew scriptures. God must be there all alone. We must 
say, "Not I, but Thou," and then we should give up everything but the Lord. 

He, and He alone, should reign. Perhaps we struggle hard, and yet the next 
moment our feet slip, and then we try to stretch out our hands to Mother. We 



find we cannot stand alone. Life is infinite, one chapter of which is, "Thy will 
be done," and unless we realise all the chapters we cannot realise the whole. 
"Thy will be done" — every moment the traitor mind rebels against it, yet it 
must be said, again and again, if we are to conquer the lower self. We cannot 
serve a traitor and yet be saved. There is salvation for all except the traitor and 
we stand condemned as traitors, traitors against our own selves, against the 
majesty of Mother, when we refuse to obey the voice of our higher Self. Come 
what will, we must give our bodies and minds up to the Supreme Will. Well 
has it been said by the Hindu philosopher, "If man says twice, 'Thy will be 
done,' he commits sin." "Thy will be done," what more is needed, why say it 
twice? What is good is good. No more shall we take it back. "Thy will be done 
on earth as it is in heaven, for Thine is the kingdom and the power and the 
glory for evermore." 


» 



Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

VEDIC RELIGIOUS IDEALS 

What concerns us most is the religious thought — on soul and God and all that 
appertains to religion. We will take the Samhitas. These are collections of 
hymns forming, as it were, the oldest Aryan literature, properly speaking, the 
oldest literature in the world. There may have been some scraps of literature of 
older date here and there, older than that even, but not books, or literature 
properly so called. As a collected book, this is the oldest the world has, and 
herein is portrayed the earliest feeling of the Aryans, their aspirations, the 
questions that arose about their manners and methods, and so on. At the very 
outset we find a very curious idea. These hymns are sung in praise of different 
gods, Devas as they are called, the bright ones. There is quite a number of 
them. One is called Indra, another Varuna, another Mitra, Parjanya, and so on. 
Various mythological and allegorical figures come before us one after the other 
— for instance, Indra the thunderer, striking the serpent who has withheld the 
rains from mankind. Then he lets fly his thunderbolt, the serpent is killed, and 
rain comes down in showers. The people are pleased, and they worship Indra 
with oblations. They make a sacrificial pyre, kill some animals, roast their flesh 
upon spits, and offer that meat to Indra. And they had a popular plant called 
Soma. What plant it was nobody knows now; it has entirely disappeared, but 
from the books we gather that, when crushed, it produced a sort of milky juice, 
and that was fermented; and it can also be gathered that this fermented Soma 
juice was intoxicating. This also they offered to Indra and the other gods, and 
they also drank it themselves. Sometimes they drank a little too much, and so 
did the gods. Indra on occasions got drunk. There are passages to show that 
Indra at one time drank so much of this Soma juice that he talked irrelevant 
words. So with Varuna. He is another god, very powerful, and is in the same 
way protecting his votaries, and they are praising him with their libations of 
Soma. So is the god of war, and so on. But the popular idea that strikes one as 
making the mythologies of the Samhitas entirely different from the other 

mythologies is, that along with every one of these gods is the idea of an 

_ >\ 

infinity. This infinite is abstracted, and sometimes described as Aditya. At 
other times it is affixed, as it were, to all the other gods. Take, for example, 
Indra. In some of the books you will find that Indra has a body, is very strong. 









sometimes is wearing golden armour, and comes down, lives and eats with his 
votaries, fights the demons, fights the snakes, and so on. Again, in one hymn 
we find that Indra has been given a very high position; he is omnipresent and 
omnipotent, and Indra sees the heart of every being. So with Varuna. This 
Varuna is god of the air and is in charge of the water, just as Indra was 
previously; and then, all of a sudden, we find him raised up and said to be 
omnipresent, omnipotent, and so on. I will read one passage about this Varuna 
in his highest form, and you will understand what I mean. It has been translated 
into English poetry, so it is better that I read it in that form. 

The mighty Lord on high our deeds, as if at hand, espies; 

The gods know all men do, though men would fain their acts disguise; 

Whoever stands, whoever moves, or steals from place to place. 

Or hides him in his secret cell — the gods his movements trace. 

Wherever two together plot, and deem they are alone. 

King Varuna is there, a third, and all their schemes are known. 

This earth is his, to him belong those vast and boundless skies; 

Both seas within him rest, and yet in that small pool he lies. 

Whoever far beyond the sky should think his way to wing. 

He could not there elude the grasp of Varuna the King. 

His spies, descending from the skies, glide all this world around; 

Their thousand eyes all-scanning sweep to earth's remotest bound. 

So we can multiply examples about the other gods; they all come, one after the 
other, to share the same fate — they first begin as gods, and then they are 
raised to this conception as the Being in whom the whole universe exists, who 
sees every heart, who is the ruler of the universe. And in the case of Varuna, 
there is another idea. Just the germ of one idea which came, but was 
immediately suppressed by the Aryan mind, and that was the idea of fear. In 
another place we read they are afraid they have sinned and ask Varuna for 
pardon. These ideas were never allowed, for reasons you will come to 
understand later on, to grow on Indian soil, but the germs were there sprouting, 
the idea of fear, and the idea of sin. This is the idea, as you all know, of what is 
called monotheism. This monotheism, we see, came to India at a very early 
period. Throughout the Samhitas, in the first and oldest part, this monotheistic 
idea prevails, but we shall find that it did not prove sufficient for the Aryans; 



they threw it aside, as it were, as a very primitive sort of idea and went further 
on, as we Hindus think. Of course in reading books and criticisms on the Vedas 
written by Europeans, the Hindu cannot help smiling when he reads, that the 
writings of our authors are saturated with this previous education alone. 

Persons who have sucked in as their mother's milk the idea that the highest 
ideal of God is the idea of a Personal God, naturally dare not think on the lines 
of these ancient thinkers of India, when they find that just after the Samhitas, 
the monotheistic idea with which the Samhita portion is replete was thought by 
the Aryans to be useless and not worthy of philosophers and thinkers, and that 
they struggled hard for a more philosophical and transcendental idea. The 
monotheistic idea was much too human for them, although they gave it such 
descriptions as "The whole universe rests in Him," and "Thou art the keeper of 
all hearts." The Hindus were bold, to their great credit be it said, bold thinkers 
in all their ideas, so bold that one spark of their thought frightens the so-called 
bold thinkers of the West. Well has it been said by Prof. Max Muller about 
these thinkers that they climbed up to heights where their lungs only could 
breathe, and where those of other beings would have burst. These brave people 
followed reason wherever it led them, no matter at what cost, never caring if all 
their best superstitions were smashed to pieces, never caring what society 
would think about them, or talk about them; but what they thought was right 
and true, they preached and they talked. 

Before going into all these speculations of the ancient Vedic sages, we will first 
refer to one or two very curious instances in the Vedas. The peculiar fact — 
that these gods are taken up, as it were, one after the other, raised and 
sublimated, till each has assumed the proportions of the infinite Personal God 
of the Universe — calls for an explanation. Prof. Max Muller creates for it a 
new name, as he thinks it peculiar to the Hindus: he calls it "Henotheism". We 
need not go far for the explanation. It is within the book. A few steps from the 
very place where we find those gods being raised and sublimated, we find the 
explanation also. The question arises how the Hindu mythologies should be so 
unique, so different from all others. In Babylonian or Greek mythologies we 
find one god struggling upwards, and he assumes a position and remains there, 
while the other gods die out. Of all the Molochs, Jehovah becomes supreme, 
and the other Molochs are forgotten, lost for ever; he is the God of gods. So, 
too, of all the Greek gods, Zeus comes to the front and assumes big 




proportions, becomes the God of the Universe, and all the other gods become 
degraded into minor angels. This fact was repeated in later times. The 
Buddhists and the Jains raised one of their prophets to the Godhead, and all the 
other gods they made subservient to Buddha, or to Jina. This is the world-wide 
process, but there we find an exception, as it were. One god is praised, and for 
the time being it is said that all the other gods obey his commands, and the very 
one who is said to be raised up by Varuna, is himself raised up, in the next 
book, to the highest position. They occupy the position of the Personal God in 
turns. But the explanation is there in the book, and it is a grand explanation, 
one that has given the theme to all subsequent thought in India, and one that 
will be the theme of the whole world of religions: "Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha 
Vadanti — That which exists is One; sages call It by various names." In all 
these cases where hymns were written about all these gods, the Being 
perceived was one and the same; it was the perceiver who made the difference. 
It was the hymnist, the sage, the poet, who sang in different languages and 
different words, the praise of one and the same Being. "That which exists is 
One; sages call It by various names." Tremendous results have followed from 
that one verse. Some of you, perhaps, are surprised to think that India is the 
only country where there never has been a religious persecution, where never 
was any man disturbed for his religious faith. Theists or atheists, monists, 
dualists, monotheists are there and always live unmolested. Materialists were 
allowed to preach from the steps of Brahminical temples, against the gods, and 
against God Himself; they went preaching all over the land that the idea of God 
was a mere superstition, and that gods, and Vedas, and religion were simply 
superstitions invented by the priests for their own benefit, and they were 
allowed to do this unmolested. And so, wherever he went, Buddha tried to pull 
down every old thing sacred to the Hindus to the dust, and Buddha died of ripe 
old age. So did the Jains, who laughed at the idea of God. "How can it be that 
there is a God?" they asked; "it must be a mere superstition." So on, endless 
examples there are. Before the Mohammedan wave came into India, it was 
never known what religious persecution was; the Hindus had only experienced 
it as made by foreigners on themselves. And even now it is a patent fact how 
much Hindus have helped to build Christian churches, and how much readiness 
there is to help them. There never has been bloodshed. Even heterodox 
religions that have come out of India have been likewise affected; for instance. 
Buddhism. Buddhism is a great religion in some respects, but to confuse 



Buddhism with Vedanta is without meaning; anyone may mark just the 
difference that exists between Christianity and the Salvation Army. There are 
great and good points in Buddhism, but these great points fell into hands which 
were not able to keep them safe. The jewels which came from philosophers fell 
into the hands of mobs, and the mobs took up their ideas. They had a great deal 
of enthusiasm, some marvellous ideas, great and humanitarian ideas, but, after 
all, there is something else that is necessary — thought and intellect — to keep 
everything safe. Wherever you see the most humanitarian ideas fall into the 
hands of the multitude, the first result, you may notice, is degradation. It is 
learning and intellect that keep things sure. Now this Buddhism went as the 
first missionary religion to the world, penetrated the whole of the civilised 
world as it existed at that time, and never was a drop of blood shed for that 
religion. We read how in China the Buddhist missionaries were persecuted, and 
thousands were massacred by two or three successive emperors, but after that, 
fortune favoured the Buddhists, and one of the emperors offered to take 
vengeance on the persecutors, but the missionaries refused. All that we owe to 
this one verse. That is why I want you to remember it: "Whom they call Indra, 
Mitra, Varuna — That which exists is One; sages call It by various names." 

It was written, nobody knows at what date, it may be 8,000 years ago, in spite 
of all modern scholars may say, it may be 9,000 years ago. Not one of these 
religious speculations is of modern date, but they are as fresh today as they 
were when they were written, or rather, fresher, for at that distant date man was 
not so civilised as we know him now. He had not learnt to cut his brother's 
throat because he differed a little in thought from himself; he had not deluged 
the world in blood, he did not become demon to his own brother. In the name 
of humanity he did not massacre whole lots of mankind then. Therefore these 
words come to us today very fresh, as great stimulating, life-giving words, 
much fresher than they were when they were written: "That which exists is 
One; sages call It by various names." We have to learn yet that all religions, 
under whatever name they may be called, either Hindu, Buddhist, 
Mohammedan, or Christian, have the same God, and he who derides any one of 
these derides his own God. 

That was the solution they arrived at. But, as I have said, this ancient 
monotheistic idea did not satisfy the Hindu mind. It did not go far enough, it 




did not explain the visible world: a ruler of the world does not explain the 
world — certainly not. A ruler of the universe does not explain the universe, 
and much less an external ruler, one outside of it. He may be a moral guide, the 
greatest power in the universe, but that is no explanation of the universe; and 
the first question that we find now arising, assuming proportions, is the 
question about the universe: "Whence did it come?" "How did it come?" "How 
does it exist?" Various hymns are to be found on this question struggling 
forward to assume form, and nowhere do we find it so poetically, so 
wonderfully expressed as in the following hymn: 

"Then there was neither aught nor naught, nor air, nor sky, nor anything. What 
covered all? Where rested all? Then death was not, nor deathlessness, nor 
change to night and day." The translation loses a good deal of the poetical 
beauty. "Then death was not, nor deathlessness, nor change to night and day;" 
the very sound of the Sanskrit is musical. "'That existed, that breath, covering as 
it were, that God's existence; but it did not begin to move." It is good to 
remember this one idea that it existed motionless, because we shall find how 
this idea sprouts up afterwards in the cosmology, how according to the Hindu 
metaphysics and philosophy, this whole universe is a mass of vibrations, as it 
were, motions; and there are periods when this whole mass of motions subsides 
and becomes finer and finer, remaining in that state for some time. That is the 
state described in this hymn. It existed unmoved, without vibration, and when 
this creation began, this began to vibrate and all this creation came out of it, 
that one breath, calm, self-sustained, naught else beyond it. 

"Gloom existed first." Those of you who have ever been in India or any 
tropical country, and have seen the bursting of the monsoon, will understand 
the majesty of these words. I remember three poets' attempts to picture this. 
Milton says, "No light, but rather darkness visible." Kalidasa says, "Darkness 
which can be penetrated with a needle," but none comes near this Vedic 
description, "Gloom hidden in gloom." Everything is parching and sizzling, the 
whole creation seems to be burning away, and for days it has been so, when 
one afternoon there is in one corner of the horizon a speck of cloud, and in less 
than half an hour it has extended unto the whole earth, until, as it were, it is 
covered with cloud, cloud over cloud, and then it bursts into a tremendous 
deluge of rain. The cause of creation was described as will. That which existed 


at first became changed into will, and this will began to manifest itself as 
desire. This also we ought to remember, because we find that this idea of desire 
is said to be the cause of all we have. This idea of will has been the corner¬ 
stone of both the Buddhist and the Vedantic system, and later on, has 
penetrated into German philosophy and forms the basis of Schopenhauer's 
system of philosophy. It is here we first hear of it. 

"Now first arose desire, the primal seed of mind. 

Sages, searching in their hearts by wisdom, found the bond. 

Between existence and non-existence." 

It is a very peculiar expression; the poet ends by saying that "perhaps He even 
does not know." We find in this hymn, apart from its poetical merits, that this 
questioning about the universe has assumed quite definite proportions, and that 
the minds of these sages must have advanced to such a state, when all sorts of 
common answers would not satisfy them. We find that they were not even 
satisfied with this Governor above. There are various other hymns where the 
same idea, comes in, about how this all came, and just as we have seen, when 
they were trying to find a Governor of the universe, a Personal God, they were 
taking up one Deva after another, raising him up to that position, so now we 
shall find that in various hymns one or other idea is taken up, and expanded 
infinitely and made responsible for everything in the universe. One particular 
idea is taken as the support, in which everything rests and exists, and that 
support has become all this. So on with various ideas. They tried this method 
with Prana, the life principle. They expanded the idea of the life principle until 
it became universal and infinite. It is the life principle that is supporting 
everything; not only the human body, but it is the light of the sun and the 
moon, it is the power moving everything, the universal motive energy. Some of 
these attempts are very beautiful, very poetical. Some of them as, "He ushers 
the beautiful morning," are marvellously lyrical in the way they picture things. 
Then this very desire, which, as we have just read, arose as the first primal 
germ of creation, began to be stretched out, until it became the universal God. 
But none of these ideas satisfied. 

Here the idea is sublimated and finally abstracted into a personality. "He alone 
existed in the beginning; He is the one Lord of all that exists; He supports this 
universe; He who is the author of souls. He who is the author of strength. 


whom all the gods worship, whose shadow is life, whose shadow is death; 
whom else shall we worship? Whose glory the snow-tops of the Himalayas 
declare, whose glory the oceans with all their waters proclaim." So on it goes, 
but, as I told you just now, this idea did not satisfy them. 

At last we find a very peculiar position. The Aryan mind had so long been 
seeking an answer to the question from outside. They questioned everything 
they could find, the sun, the moon, and stars, and they found all they could in 
this way. The whole of nature at best could teach them only of a personal Being 
who is the Ruler of the universe; it could teach nothing further. In short, out of 
the external world we can only get the idea of an architect, that which is called 
the Design Theory. It is not a very logical argument, as we all know; there is 
something childish about it, yet it is the only little bit of anything we can know 
about God from the external world, that this world required a builder. But this 
is no explanation of the universe. The materials of this world were before Him, 
and this God wanted all these materials, and the worst objection is that He must 
be limited by the materials. The builder could not have made a house without 
the materials of which it is composed. Therefore he was limited by the 
materials; he could only do what the materials enabled him to. Therefore the 
God that the Design Theory gives is at best only an architect, and a limited 
architect of the universe; He is bound and restricted by the materials; He is not 
independent at all. That much they had found out already, and many other 
minds would have rested at that. In other countries the same thing happened; 
the human mind could not rest there; the thinking, grasping minds wanted to go 
further, but those that were backward got hold of them and did not allow them 
to grow. But fortunately these Hindu sages were not the people to be knocked 
on the head; they wanted to get a solution, and now we find that they were 
leaving the external for the internal. The first thing that struck them was, that it 
is not with the eyes and the senses that we perceive that external world, and 
know anything about religion; the first idea, therefore, was to find the 
deficiency, and that deficiency was both physical and moral, as we shall see. 
You do not know, says one of these sages, the cause of this universe; there has 
arisen a tremendous difference between you and me — why? Because you have 
been talking sense things and are satisfied with sense-objects and with the mere 
ceremonials of religion, while I have known the Purusha beyond. 


Along with this progress of spiritual ideas that I am trying to trace for you, I 
can only hint to you a little about the other factor in the growth, for that has 
nothing to do with our subject, therefore I need not enlarge upon it — the 
growth of rituals. As those spiritual ideas progressed in arithmetical 
progression, so the ritualistic ideas progressed in geometrical progression. The 
old superstitions had by this time developed into a tremendous mass of rituals, 
which grew and grew till it almost killed the Hindu life And it is still there, it 
has got hold of and permeated every portion of our life and made us born 
slaves. Yet, at the same time, we find a fight against this advance of ritual from 
the very earliest days. The one objection raised there is this, that love for 
ceremonials, dressing at certain times, eating in a certain way, and shows and 
mummeries of religion like these are only external religion, because you are 
satisfied with the senses and do not want to go beyond them. This is a 
tremendous difficulty with us, with every human being. At best when we want 
to hear of spiritual things our standard is the senses; or a man hears things 
about philosophy, and God, and transcendental things, and after hearing about 
them for days, he asks: After all, how much money will they bring, how much 
sense-enjoyment will they bring? For his enjoyment is only in the senses, quite 
naturally. But that satisfaction in the senses, says our sage, is one of the causes 
which have spread the veil between truth and ourselves. Devotion to 
ceremonials, satisfaction in the senses, and forming various theories, have 
drawn a veil between ourselves and truth. This is another great landmark, and 
we shall have to trace this ideal to the end, and see how it developed later on 
into that wonderful theory of Maya of the Vedanta, how this veil will be the 
real explanation of the Vedanta, how the truth was there all the time, it was 
only this veil that had covered it. 

Thus we find that the minds of these ancient Aryan thinkers had begun a new 
theme. They found out that in the external world no search would give an 
answer to their question. They might seek in the external world for ages, but 
there would be no answer to their questions. So they fell back upon this other 
method; and according to this, they were taught that these desires of the senses, 
desires for ceremonials and externalities have caused a veil to come between 
themselves and the truth, and that this cannot be removed by any ceremonial. 
They had to fall back on their own minds, and analyse the mind to find the 
truth in themselves. The outside world failed and they turned back upon the 



inside world, and then it became the real philosophy of the Vedanta; from here 
the Vedanta philosophy begins. It is the foundation-stone of Vedanta 
philosophy. As we go on, we find that all its inquiries are inside. From the very 
outset they seemed to declare — look not for the truth in any religion; it is here 
in the human soul, the miracle of all miracles in the human soul, the emporium 
of all knowledge, the mine of all existence — seek here. What is not here 
cannot be there. And they found out step by step that that which is external is 
but a dull reflection at best of that which is inside. We shall see how they took, 
as it were, this old idea of God, the Governor of the universe, who is external to 
the universe, and first put Him inside the universe. He is not a God outside, but 
He is inside; and they took Him from there into their own hearts. Here He is in 
the heart of man, the Soul of our souls, the Reality in us. 

Several great ideas have to be understood, in order to grasp properly the 
workings of the Vedanta philosophy. In the first place it is not philosophy in 
the sense we speak of the philosophy of Kant and Hegel. It is not one book, or 
the work of one man. Vedanta is the name of a series of books written at 
different times. Sometimes in one of these productions there will be fifty 
different things. Neither are they properly arranged; the thoughts, as it were, 
have been jotted down. Sometimes in the midst of other extraneous things, we 
find some wonderful idea. But one fact is remarkable, that these ideas in the 
Upanishads would be always progressing. In that crude old language, the 
working of the mind of every one of the sages has been, as it were, painted just 
as it went; how the ideas are at first very crude, and they become finer and finer 
till they reach the goal of the Vedanta, and this goal assumes a philosophical 
name. Just at first it was a search after the Devas, the bright ones, and then it 
was the origin of the universe, and the very same search is getting another 
name, more philosophical, clearer — the unity of all things — "Knowing 
which everything else becomes known." 


» 





« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE VEDANTA PHILOSOPHY 

The Vedanta philosophy, as it is generally called at the present day, really 
comprises all the various sects that now exist in India. Thus there have been 
various interpretations, and to my mind they have been progressive, beginning 
with the dualistic or Dvaita and ending with the non-dualistic or Advaita. The 
word Vedanta literally means the end of the Vedas — the Vedas being the 
scriptures of the Hindus.* Sometimes in the West by the Vedas are meant only 
the hymns and rituals of the Vedas. But at the present time these parts have 
almost gone out of use, and usually by the word Vedas in India, the Vedanta is 
meant. All our commentators, when they want to quote a passage from the 
scriptures, as a rule, quote from the Vedanta, which has another technical name 
with the commentators — the Shrutis. (The term Shruti — meaning "that which is 
heard" — though including the whole of the Vedic literature, is chiefly applied by the 
commentators to the Upanishads.) Now, all the books known by the name of the 
Vedanta were not entirely written after the ritualistic portions of the Vedas. For 
instance, one of them — the Isha Upanishad — forms the fortieth chapter of 
the Yajur-Veda, that being one of the oldest parts of the Vedas. There are other 
Upanishads* which form portions of the Brahmanas or ritualistic writings; and 
the rest of the Upanishads are independent, not comprised in any of the 
Brahmanas or other parts of the Vedas; but there is no reason to suppose that 
they were entirely independent of other parts, for, as we well know, many of 
these have been lost entirely and many of the Brahmanas have become extinct. 
So it is quite possible that the independent Upanishads belonged to some 
Brahmanas, which in course of time fell into disuse, while the Upanishads 
remained. These Upanishads are also called Forest Books or Aranyakas. 

The Vedanta, then, practically forms the scriptures of the Hindus, and all 
systems of philosophy that are orthodox have to take it as their foundation. 
Even the Buddhists and Jains, when it suits their purpose, will quote a passage 
from the Vedanta as authority. All schools of philosophy in India, although 
they claim to have been based upon the Vedas, took different names for their 
systems. The last one, the system of Vyasa, took its stand upon the doctrines of 
the Vedas more than the previous systems did, and made an attempt to 









harmonise the preceding philosophies, such as the Sankhya and the Nyaya, 
with the doctrines of the Vedanta. So it is especially called the Vedanta 
philosophy; and the Sutras or aphorisms of Vyasa are, in modern India, the 
basis of the Vedanta philosophy. Again, these Sutras of Vyasa have been 
variously explained by different commentators. In general there are three sorts 
of commentators* in India now; from their interpretations have arisen three 
systems of philosophy and sects. One is the dualistic, or Dvaita; a second is the 
qualified non-dualistic, or VishishtMvaita; and a third is the non-dualistic, or 
Advaita. Of these the dualistic and the qualified non-dualistic include the 
largest number of the Indian people. The non-dualists are comparatively few in 
number. Now I will try to lay before you the ideas that are contained in all 
these three sects; but before going on, I will make one remark — that these 
different Vedanta systems have one common psychology, and that is, the 
psychology of the Sankhya system. The Sankhya psychology is very much like 
the psychologies of the Nyaya and Vaisheshika systems, differing only in 
minor particulars. 

All the Vedantists agree on three points. They believe in God, in the Vedas as 
revealed, and in cycles. We have already considered the Vedas. The belief 
about cycles is as follows: All matter throughout the universe is the outcome of 
one primal matter called Akasha; and all force, whether gravitation, attraction 
or repulsion, or life, is the outcome of one primal force called Prana. Prana 
acting on Akasha is creating or projecting* the universe. At the beginning of a 
cycle, Akasha is motionless, unmanifested. Then Prana begins to act, more and 
more, creating grosser and grosser forms out of Akasha — plants, animals, 
men, stars, and so on. After an incalculable time this evolution ceases and 
involution begins, everything being resolved back through finer and finer forms 
into the original Akasha and Prana, when a new cycle follows. Now there is 
something beyond Akasha and Prana. Both can be resolved into a third thing 
called Mahat — the Cosmic Mind. This Cosmic Mind does not create Akasha 
and Prana, but changes itself into them. 

We will now take up the beliefs about mind, soul, and God. According to the 
universally accepted Sankhya psychology, in perception — in the case of 
vision, for instance — there are, first of all, the instruments of vision, the eyes. 
Behind the instruments — the eyes — is the organ of vision or Indriya — the 








optic nerve and its centres — which is not the external instrument, but without 
which the eyes will not see. More still is needed for perception. The mind or 
Manas must come and attach itself to the organ. And besides this, the sensation 
must be carried to the intellect or Buddhi — the determinative, reactive state of 
the mind. When the reaction comes from Buddhi, along with it flashes the 
external world and egoism. Here then is the will; but everything is not 
complete. Just as every picture, being composed of successive impulses of 
light, must be united on something stationary to form a whole, so all the ideas 
in the mind must be gathered and projected on something that is stationary — 
relatively to the body and mind — that is, on what is called the Soul or Purusha 
or Atman. 

According to the Sankhya philosophy, the reactive state of the mind called 
Buddhi or intellect is the outcome, the change, or a certain manifestation of the 
Mahat or Cosmic Mind. The Mahat becomes changed into vibrating thought; 
and that becomes in one part changed into the organs, and in the other part into 
the fine particles of matter. Out of the combination of all these, the whole of 
this universe is produced. Behind even Mahat, the Sankhya conceives of a 
certain state which is called Avyakta or unmanifested, where even the 
manifestation of mind is not present, but only the causes exist. It is also called 
Prakriti. Beyond this Prakriti, and eternally separate from it, is the Purusha, the 
soul of the Sankhya which is without attributes and omnipresent. The Purusha 
is not the doer but the witness. The illustration of the crystal is used to explain 
the Purusha. The latter is said to be like a crystal without any colour, before 
which different colours are placed, and then it seems to be coloured by the 
colours before it, but in reality it is not. The Vedantists reject the Sankhya ideas 
of the soul and nature. They claim that between them there is a huge gulf to be 
bridged over. On the one hand the Sankhya system comes to nature, and then at 
once it has to jump over to the other side and come to the soul, which is 
entirely separate from nature. How can these different colours, as the Sankhya 
calls them, be able to act on that soul which by its nature is colourless? So the 
Vedantists, from the very first affirm that this soul and this nature are one.* 
Even dualistic Vedantists admit that the Atman or God is not only the efficient 
cause of this universe, but also the material cause. But they only say so in so 
many words. They do not really mean it, for they try to escape from their 
conclusions, in this way: They say there are three existences in this universe — 






God, soul, and nature. Nature and soul are, as it were, the body of God, and in 
this sense it may be said that God and the whole universe are one. But this 
nature and all these various souls remain different from each other through all 
eternity. Only at the beginning of a cycle do they become manifest; and when 
the cycle ends, they become fine, and remain in a fine state. The Advaita 
Vedantists — the non-dualists — reject this theory of the soul, and, having 
nearly the whole range of the Upanishads in their favour, build their philosophy 
entirely upon them. All the books contained in me Upanishads have one 
subject, one task before them — to prove the following theme: "Just as by the 
knowledge of one lump of clay we have the knowledge of all the clay in the 
universe, so what is that, knowing which we know everything in the universe?" 
The idea of the Advaitists is to generalise the whole universe into one — that 
something which is really the whole of this universe. And they claim that this 
whole universe is one, that it is one Being manifesting itself in all these various 
forms. They admit that what the Sankhya calls nature exists, but say that nature 
is God. It is this Being, the Sat, which has become converted into all this — the 
universe, man, soul, and everything that exists. Mind and Mahat are but the 
manifestations of that one Sat. But then the difficulty arises that this would be 
pantheism. How came that Sat which is unchangeable, as they admit (for that 
which is absolute is unchangeable), to be changed into that which is 
changeable, and perishable? The Advaitists here have a theory which they call 
Vivarta VMa or apparent manifestation. According to the dualists and the 
Sankhyas, the whole of this universe is the evolution of primal nature. 
According to some of the Advaitists and some of the dualists, the whole of this 
universe is evolved from God. And according to the Advaitists proper, the 
followers of Shankaracharya, the whole universe is the apparent evolution of 
God. God is the material cause of this universe, but not really, only apparently. 
The celebrated illustration used is that of the rope and the snake, where the 
rope appeared to be the snake, but was not really so. The rope did not really 
change into the snake. Even so this whole universe as it exists is that Being. It 
is unchanged, and all the changes we see in it are only apparent. These changes 
are caused by Desha, Kala and Nimitta (space, time, and causation), or, 
according to a higher psychological generalization, by Nama and Rupa (name 
and form). It is by name and form that one thing is differentiated from another. 
The name and form alone cause the difference. In reality they are one and the 
same. Again, it is not, the Vedantists say, that there is something as 





phenomenon and something as noumenon. The rope is changed into the snake 
apparently only; and when the delusion ceases, the snake vanishes. When one 
is in ignorance, he sees the phenomenon and does not see God. When he sees 
God, this universe vanishes entirely for him. Ignorance or Maya, as it is called, 
is the cause of all this phenomenon — the Absolute, the Unchangeable, being 
taken as this manifested universe. This Maya is not absolute zero, nor non¬ 
existence. It is defined as neither existence nor non-existence. It is not 
existence, because that can be said only of the Absolute, the Unchangeable, and 
in this sense, Maya is non-existence. Again, it cannot be said it is non¬ 
existence; for if it were, it could never produce phenomenon. So it is something 
which is neither; and in the Vedanta philosophy it is called Anirvachaniya or 
inexpressible. Maya, then, is the real cause of this universe. Maya gives the 
name and form to what Brahman or God gives the material; and the latter 
seems to have been transformed into all this. The Advaitists, then, have no 
place for the individual soul. They say individual souls are created by Maya. In 
reality they cannot exist. If there were only one existence throughout, how 
could it be that I am one, and you are one, and so forth? We are all one, and the 
cause of evil is the perception of duality. As soon as I begin to feel that I am 
separate from this universe, then first comes fear, and linen comes misery. 
"Where one hears another, one sees another, that is small. Where one does not 
see another, where one does not hear another, that is the greatest, that is God. 

In that greatest is perfect happiness. In small thing; there is no happiness." 

According to the Advaita philosophy, then, this differentiation of matter, these 
phenomena, are, as it were, for a time, hiding the real nature of man; but the 
latter really has not been changed at all. In the lowest worm, as well as in the 
highest human being, the same divine nature is present. The worm form is the 
lower form in which the divinity has been more overshadowed by Maya; that is 
the highest form in which it has been least overshadowed. Behind everything 
the same divinity is existing, and out of this comes the basis of morality. Do 
not injure another. Love everyone as your own self, because the whole universe 
is one. In injuring another, I am injuring myself; in loving another, I am loving 
myself. From this also springs that principle of Advaita morality which has 
been summed up in one word — self-abnegation. The Advaitist says, this little 
personalised self is the cause of al my misery. This individualized self, which 
makes me different from all other beings, brings hatred and jealousy and 



misery, struggle and all other evils. And when this idea has been got rid of, all 
struggle will cease, all misery vanish. So this is to be given up. We must 
always hold ourselves ready, even to give up our lives for the lowest beings. 
When a man has become ready even to give up his life for a little insect, he has 
reached the perfection which the Advaitist wants to attain; and at that moment 
when he has become thus ready, the veil of ignorance falls away from him, and 
he will feel his own nature. Even in this life, he will feel that he is one with the 
universe. For a time, as it were, the whole of this phenomenal world will 
disappear for him, and he will realise what he is. But so long as the Karma of 
this body remains, he will have to live. This state, when the veil has vanished 
and yet the body remains for some time, is what the Vedantists call the 
Jivanmukti, the living freedom. If a man is deluded by a mirage for some time, 
and one day the mirage disappears — if it comes back again the next day, or at 
some future time, he will not be deluded. Before the mirage first broke, the 
man could not distinguish between the reality and the deception. But when it 
has once broken, as long as he has organs and eyes to work with, he will see 
the image, but will no more be deluded. That fine distinction between the 
actual world and the mirage he has caught, and the latter cannot delude him any 
more. So when the Vedantist has realised his own nature, the whole world has 

vanished for him. It will come back again, but no more the same world of 

_ 

misery. The prison of misery has become changed into Sat, Chit, Ananda — 
Existence Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, Bliss Absolute — and the 
attainment of this is the goal of the Advaita Philosophy. 

(The above address was delivered before the Graduate Philosophical Society of Harvard 
University, on March 25, 1896.) 

(A discussion following this is available at Vol. V.) 

» 





« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


REASON AND RELIGION 

{Delivered in England) 

A sage called Narada went to another sage named Sanatkumara to learn about 
truth, and Sanatkumara inquired what he had studied already. Narada answered 
that he had studied the Vedas, Astronomy, and various other things, yet he had 
got no satisfaction. Then there was a conversation between the two, in the 
course of which Sanatkumara remarked that all this knowledge of the Vedas, of 
Astronomy, and of Philosophy, was but secondary; sciences were but 
secondary. That which made us realise the Brahman was the supreme, the 
highest knowledge. This idea we find in every religion, and that is why religion 
always claimed to be supreme knowledge. Knowledge of the sciences covers, as 
it were, only part of our lives, but the knowledge which religion brings to us is 
eternal, as infinite as the truth it preaches. Claiming this superiority, religions 
have many times looked down, unfortunately, on all secular knowledge, and not 
only so, but many times have refused to be justified by the aid of secular 
knowledge. In consequence, all the world over there have been fights between 
secular knowledge and religious knowledge, the one claiming infallible 
authority as its guide, refusing to listen to anything that secular knowledge has 
to say on the point, the other, with its shining instrument of reason, wanting to 
cut to pieces everything religion could bring forward. This fight has been and is 
still waged in every country. Religions have been again and again defeated, and 
almost exterminated. The worship of the goddess of Reason during the French 
Revolution was not the first manifestation of that phenomenon in the history of 
humanity, it was a re-enactment of what had happened in ancient times, but in 
modem times it has assumed greater proportions. The physical sciences are 
better equipped now than formerly, and religions have become less and less 
equipped. The foundations have been all undermined, and the modern man, 
whatever he may say in public, knows in the privacy of his heart that he can no 
more "believe". Believing certain things because an organised body of priests 
tells him to believe, believing because it is written in certain books, believing 
because his people like him to believe, the modern man knows to be impossible 
for him. There are, of course, a number of people who seem to acquiesce in the 






so-called popular faith, but we also know for certain that they do not think. 

Their idea of belief may be better translated as "not-thinking-carelessness". This 
fight cannot last much longer without breaking to pieces all the buildings of 
religion. 

The question is: Is there a way out? To put it in a more concrete form: Is 
religion to justify itself by the discoveries of reason, through which every other 
science justifies itself? Are the same methods of investigation, which we apply 
to sciences and knowledge outside, to be applied to the science of Religion? In 
my opinion this must be so, and I am also of opinion that the sooner it is done 
the better. If a religion is destroyed by such investigations, it was then all the 
time useless, unworthy superstition; and the sooner it goes the better. I am 
thoroughly convinced that its destruction would be the best thing that could 
happen. All that is dross will be taken off, no doubt, but the essential parts of 
religion will emerge triumphant out of this investigation. Not only will it be 
made scientific — as scientific, at least, as any of the conclusions of physics or 
chemistry — but will have greater strength, because physics or chemistry has 
no internal mandate to vouch for its truth, which religion has. 

People who deny the efficacy of any rationalistic investigation into religion 
seem to me somewhat to be contradicting themselves. For instance, the 
Christian claims that his religion is the only true one, because it was revealed to 
so-and-so. The Mohammedan makes the same claim for his religion; his is the 
only true one, because it was revealed to so-and-so. But the Christian says to 
the Mohammedan, "Certain parts of your ethics do not seem to be right. For 
instance, your books say, my Mohammedan friend, that an infidel may be 
converted to the religion of Mohammed by force, and if he will not accept the 
Mohammedan religion he may be killed; and any Mohammedan who kills such 
an infidel will get a sure entry into heaven, whatever may have been his sins or 
misdeeds." The Mohammedan will retort by saying, "It is right for me to do so, 
because my book enjoins it. It will be wrong on my part not to do so." The 
Christian says, "But my book does not say so." The Mohammedan replies, "I do 
not know; I am not bound by the authority of your book; my book says, 'Kill all 
the infidels'. How do you know which is right and which is wrong? Surely what 
is written in my book is right and what your book says, 'Do not kill,' is wrong. 
You also say the same thing, my Christian friend; you say that what Jehovah 


declared to the Jews is right to do, and what he forbade them to do is wrong. So 
say I, Allah declared in my book that certain things should be done, and that 
certain things should not be done, and that is all the test of right and wrong." In 
spite of that the Christian is not satisfied; he insists on a comparison of the 
morality of the Sermon on the Mount with the morality of the Koran. How is 
this to be decided? Certainly not by the books, because the books, fighting 
between themselves, cannot be the judges. Decidedly then we have to admit 
that there is something more universal than these books, something higher than 
all the ethical codes that are in the world, something which can judge between 
the strength of inspirations of different nations. Whether we declare it boldly, 
clearly, or not — it is evident that here we appeal to reason. 

Now, the question arises if this light of reason is able to judge between 
inspiration and inspiration, and if this light can uphold its standard when the 
quarrel is between prophet and prophet, if it has the power of understanding 
anything whatsoever of religion. If it has not, nothing can determine the 
hopeless fight of books and prophets which has been going on through ages; for 
it means that all religions are mere lies, hopelessly contradictory, without any 
constant idea of ethics. The proof of religion depends on the truth of the 
constitution of man, and not on any books. These books are the outgoings, the 
effects of man's constitution; man made these books. We are yet to see the 
books that made man. Reason is equally an effect of that common cause, the 
constitution of man, where our appeal must be. And yet, as reason alone is 
directly connected with this constitution, it should be resorted to, as long as it 
follows faithfully the same. What do I mean by reason? I mean what every 
educated man or woman is wanting to do at the present time, to apply the 
discoveries of secular knowledge to religion. The first principle of reasoning is 
that the particular is explained by the general, the general by the more general, 
until we come to the universal. For instance, we have the idea of law. If 
something happens and we believe that it is the effect of such and such a law, 
we are satisfied; that is an explanation for us. What we mean by that 
explanation is that it is proved that this one effect, which had dissatisfied us, is 
only one particular of a general mass of occurrences which we designate by the 
word "law". When one apple fell, Newton was disturbed; but when he found 
that all apples fell, it was gravitation, and he was satisfied. This is one principle 
of human knowledge. I see a particular being, a human being, in the street. I 



refer him to the bigger conception of man, and I am satisfied; I know he is a 
man by referring him to the more general. So the particulars are to be referred 
to the general, the general to the more general, and everything at last to the 
universal, the last concept that we have, the most universal — that of existence. 
Existence is the most universal concept. 

We are all human beings; that is to say, each one of us, as it were, a particular 
part of the general concept, humanity. A man, and a cat, and a dog, are all 
animals. These particular examples, as man, or dog, or cat, are parts of a bigger 
and more general concept, animal. The man, and the cat, and the dog, and the 
plant, and the tree, all come under the still more general concept, life. Again, all 
these, all beings and all materials, come under the one concept of existence, for 
we all are in it. This explanation merely means referring the particular to a 
higher concept, finding more of its kind. The mind, as it were, has stored up 
numerous classes of such generalizations. It is, as it were, full of pigeon-holes 
where all these ideas are grouped together, and whenever we find a new thing 
the mind immediately tries to find out its type in one of these pigeon-holes. If 
we find it, we put the new thing in there and are satisfied, and we are said to 
have known the thing. This is what is meant by knowledge, and no more. And if 
we do not find that there is something like it, we are dissatisfied, and have to 
wait until we find a further classification for it, already existing in the mind. 
Therefore, as I have already pointed out, knowledge is more or less 
classification. There is something more. A second explanation of knowledge is 
that the explanation of a thing must come from inside and not from outside. 
There had been the belief that, when a man threw up a stone and it fell, some 
demon dragged it down. Many occurrences which are really natural phenomena 
are attributed by people to unnatural beings. That a ghost dragged down the 
stone was an explanation that was not in the thing itself, it was an explanation 
from outside; but the second explanation of gravitation is something in the 
nature of the stone; the explanation is coming from inside. This tendency you 
will find throughout modern thought; in one word, what is meant by science is 
that the explanations of things are in their own nature, and that no external 
beings or existences are required to explain what is going on in the universe. 

The chemist never requires demons, or ghosts, or anything of that sort, to 
explain his phenomena. The physicist never requires any one of these to explain 
the things he knows, nor does any other scientist. And this is one of the features 



of science which I mean to apply to religion. In this religions are found wanting 
and that is why they are crumbling into pieces. Every science wants its 
explanations from inside, from the very nature of things; and the religions are 
not able to supply this. There is an ancient theory of a personal deity entirely 
separate from the universe, which has been held from the very earliest time. The 
arguments in favour of this have been repeated again and again, how it is 
necessary to have a God entirely separate from the universe, an extra-cosmic 
deity, who has created the universe out of his will, and is conceived by religion 
to be its ruler. We find, apart from all these arguments, the Almighty God 
painted as the All-merciful, and at the same time, inequalities remain in the 
world. These things do not concern the philosopher at all, but he says the heart 
of the thing was wrong; it was an explanation from outside, and not inside. 

What is the cause of the universe? Something outside of it, some being who is 
moving this universe! And just as it was found insufficient to explain the 
phenomenon of the falling stone, so this was found insufficient to explain 
religion. And religions are falling to pieces, because they cannot give a better 
explanation than that. 

Another idea connected with this, the manifestation of the same principle, that 
the explanation of everything comes from inside it, is the modern law of 
evolution. The whole meaning of evolution is simply that the nature of a thing 
is reproduced, that the effect is nothing but the cause in another form, that all 
the potentialities of the effect were present in the cause, that the whole of 
creation is but an evolution and not a creation. That is to say, every effect is a 
reproduction of a preceding cause, changed only by the circumstances, and thus 
it is going on throughout the universe, and we need not go outside the universe 
to seek the causes of these changes; they are within. It is unnecessary to seek 
for any cause outside. This also is breaking down religion. What I mean by 
breaking down religion is that religions that have held on to the idea of an extra- 
cosmic deity, that he is a very big man and nothing else, can no more stand on 
their feet; they have been pulled down, as it were. 

Can there be a religion satisfying these two principles? I think there can be. In 
the first place we have seen that we have to satisfy the principle of 
generalisation. The generalisation principle ought to be satisfied along with the 
principle of evolution. We have to come to an ultimate generalisation, which 


not only will be the most universal of all generalisations, but out of which 
everything else must come. It will be of the same nature as the lowest effect; the 
cause, the highest, the ultimate, the primal cause, must be the same as the 
lowest and most distant of its effects, a series of evolutions. The Brahman of the 
Vedanta fulfils that condition, because Brahman is the last generalisation to 
which we can come. It has no attributes but is Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss 
— Absolute. Existence, we have seen, is the very ultimate generalisation which 
the human mind can come to. Knowledge does not mean the knowledge we 
have, but the essence of that, that which is expressing itself in the course of 
evolution in human beings or in other animals as knowledge. The essence of 
that knowledge is meant, the ultimate fact beyond, if I may be allowed to say 
so, even consciousness. That is what is meant by knowledge and what we see in 
the universe as the essential unity of things. To my mind, if modern science is 
proving anything again and again, it is this, that we are one — mentally, 
spiritually, and physically. It is wrong to say we are even physically different. 
Supposing we are materialists, for argument's sake, we shall have to come to 
this, that the whole universe is simply an ocean of matter, of which you and I 
are like little whirlpools. Masses of matter are coming into each whirlpool, 
taking the whirlpool form, and coming out as matter again. The matter that is in 
my body may have been in yours a few years ago, or in the sun, or may have 
been the matter in a plant, and so on, in a continuous state of flux. What is 
meant by your body and my body? It is the oneness of the body. So with 
thought. It is an ocean of thought, one infinite mass, in which your mind and 
my mind are like whirlpools. Are you not seeing the effect now, how my 
thoughts are entering into yours, and yours into mine? The whole of our lives is 
one; we are one, even in thought. Coming to a still further generalisation, the 
essence of matter and thought is their potentiality of spirit; this is the unity from 
which all have come, and that must essentially be one. We are absolutely one; 
we are physically one, we are mentally one, and as spirit, it goes without 
saying, that we are one, if we believe in spirit at all. This oneness is the one fact 
that is being proved every day by modern science. To proud man it is told: You 
are the same as that little worm there; think not that you are something 
enormously different from it; you are the same. You have been that in a 
previous incarnation, and the worm has crawled up to this man state, of which 
you are so proud. This grand preaching, the oneness of things, making us one 
with everything that exists, is the great lesson to ream, for most of us are very 



glad to be remade one with higher beings, but nobody wants to be made one 
with lower beings. Such is human ignorance, that if anyone's ancestors were 
men whom society honoured, even if they were brutish, if they were robbers, 
even robber barons, everyone of us would try to trace our ancestry to them; but 
if among our ancestors we had poor, honest gentlemen, none of us wants to 
trace our ancestry to them. But the scales are falling from our eyes, truth is 
beginning to manifest itself more and more, and that is a great gain to religion. 
That is exactly the teaching of the Advaita, about which I am lecturing to you. 
The Self is the essence of this universe, the essence of all souls; He is the 
essence of your own life, nay, "Thou art That". You are one with this universe. 
He who says he is different from others, even by a hair's breadth, immediately 
becomes miserable. Happiness belongs to him who knows this oneness, who 
knows he is one with this universe. 

Thus we see that the religion of the Vedanta can satisfy the demands of the 
scientific world, by referring it to the highest generalisation and to the law of 
evolution. That the explanation of a thing comes from within itself is still more 
completely satisfied by Vedanta. The Brahman, the God of the Vedanta, has 
nothing outside of Himself; nothing at all. All this indeed is He: He is in the 
universe: He is the universe Himself. "Thou art the man. Thou art the woman. 
Thou art the young man walking in the pride of youth. Thou art the old man 
tottering in his step." He is here. Him we see and feel: in Him we live, and 
move, and have our being. You have that conception in the New Testament. It 
is that idea, God immanent in the universe, the very essence, the heart, the soul 
of things. He manifests Himself, as it were, in this universe. You and I are little 
bits, little points, little channels, little expressions, all living inside of that 
infinite ocean of Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss. The difference between man 
and man, between angels and man, between man and animals, between animals 
and plants, between plants and stones is not in kind, because everyone from the 
highest angel to the lowest particle of matter is but an expression of that one 
infinite ocean, and the difference is only in degree. I am a low manifestation, 
you may be a higher, but in both the materials are the same. You and I are both 
outlets of the same channel, and that is God; as such, your nature is God, and so 
is mine. You are of the nature of God by your birthright; so am I. You may be 
an angel of purity, and I may be the blackest of demons. Nevertheless, my 
birthright is that infinite ocean of Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss. So is yours. 


You have manifested yourself more today. Wait; I will manifest myself more 
yet, for I have it all within me. No extraneous explanation is sought; none is 
asked for. The sum total of this whole universe is God Himself. Is God then 
matter? No, certainly not, for matter is that God perceived by the five senses; 
that God as perceived through the intellect is mind; and when the spirit sees. He 
is seen as spirit. He is not matter, but whatever is real in matter is He. Whatever 
is real in this chair is He, for the chair requires two things to make it. Something 
was outside which my senses brought to me, and to which my mind contributed 
something else, and the combination of these two is the chair. That which 
existed eternally, independent of the senses and of the intellect, was the Lord 
Himself. Upon Him the senses are painting chairs, and tables, and rooms, 
houses, and worlds, and moons, and suns, and stars, and everything else. How 
is it, then, that we all see this same chair, that we are all alike painting these 
various things on the Lord, on this Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss? It need 
not be that all paint the same way, but those who paint the same way are on the 
same plane of existence and therefore they see one another's paintings as well 
as one another. There may be millions of beings between you and me who do 
not paint the Lord in the same way, and them and their paintings we do not see. 

On the other hand, as you all know, the modem physical researches are tending 
more and more to demonstrate that what is real is but the finer; the gross is 
simply appearance. However that may be, we have seen that if any theory of 
religion can stand the test of modern reasoning, it is the Advaita, because it 
fulfils its two requirements It is the highest generalization, beyond even 
personality, generalization which is common to every being. A generalization 
ending in the Personal God can never be universal, for, first of all, to conceive 
of a Personal God we must say. He is all-merciful, all-good. But this world is a 
mixed thing, some good and some bad. We cut off what we like, and generalise 
that into a Personal God! Just as you say a Personal God is this and that, so you 
have also to say that He is not this and not that. And you will always find that 
the idea of a Personal God has to carry with it a personal devil. That is how we 
clearly see that the idea of a Personal God is not a true generalization, we have 
to go beyond, to the Impersonal. In that the universe exists, with all its joys and 
miseries, for whatever exists in it has all come from the Impersonal. What sort 
of a God can He be to whom we attribute evil and other things? The idea is that 
both good and evil are different aspects, or manifestations of the same thing. 


The idea that they were two was a very wrong idea from the first, and it has 
been the cause of a good deal of the misery in this world of ours — the idea that 
right and wrong are two separate things, cut and dried, independent of each 
other, that good and evil are two eternally separable and separate things. I 
should be very glad to see a man who could show me something which is good 
all the time, and something which is bad all the time. As if one could stand and 
gravely define some occurrences in this life of ours as good and good alone, and 
some which are bad and bad alone. That which is good today may be evil 
tomorrow. That which is bad today may be good tomorrow. What is good for 
me may be bad for you. The conclusion is, that like every other thing, there is 
an evolution in good and evil too. There is something which in its evolution, we 
call, in one degree, good, and in another, evil. The storm that kills my friend I 
call evil, but that may have saved the lives of hundreds of thousands of people 
by killing the bacilli in the air. They call it good, but I call it evil. So both good 
and evil belong to the relative world, to phenomena. The Impersonal God we 
propose is not a relative God; therefore it cannot be said that It is either good or 
bad, but that It is something beyond, because It is neither good nor evil. Good, 
however, is a nearer manifestation of It than evil. 

What is the effect of accepting such an Impersonal Being, an Impersonal Deity? 
What shall we gain? Will religion stand as a factor in human life, our consoler, 
our helper? What becomes of the desire of the human heart to pray for help to 
some being? That will all remain The Personal God will remain, but on a better 
basis. He has been strengthened by the Impersonal. We have seen that without 
the Impersonal, the Personal cannot remain If you mean to say there is a Being 
entirely separate from this universe, who has created this universe just by His 
will, out of nothing, that cannot be proved. Such a state of things cannot be. But 
if we understand the idea of the Impersonal, then the idea of the Personal can 
remain there also. This universe, in its various forms, is but the various readings 
of the same Impersonal. When we read it with the five senses, we call it the 
material world. If there be a being with more senses than five, he will read it as 
something else. If one of us gets the electrical sense, he will see the universe as 
something else again. There are various forms of that same Oneness, of which 
all these various ideas of worlds are but various readings, and the Personal God 
is the highest reading that can be attained to, of that Impersonal, by the human 
intellect. So that the Personal God is true as much as this chair is true, as much 



as this world is true, but no more. It is not absolute truth. That is to say, the 
Personal God is that very Impersonal God and, therefore, it is true, just as I, as a 
human being, am true and not true at the same time. It is not true that I am what 
you see I am; you can satisfy yourself on that point. I am not the being that you 
take me to be. You can satisfy your reason as to that, because light, and various 
vibrations, or conditions of the atmosphere, and all sorts of motions inside me 
have contributed to my being looked upon as what I am, by you. If any one of 
these conditions change, I am different again. You may satisfy yourself by 
taking a photograph of the same man under different conditions of light. So I 
am what I appear in relation to your senses, and yet, in spite of all these facts, 
there is an unchangeable something of which all these are different states of 
existence, the impersonal me, of which thousands of me's are different persons. 

I was a child, I was young, I am getting older. Every day of my life, my body 
and thoughts are changing, but in spite of all these changes, the sum-total of 
them constitutes a mass which is a constant quantity. That is the impersonal me, 
of which all these manifestations form, as it were, parts. 

Similarly, the sum-total of this universe is immovable, we know, but everything 
pertaining to this universe consists of motion, everything is in a constant state 
of flux, everything changing and moving. At the same time, we see that the 
universe as a whole is immovable, because motion is a relative term. I move 
with regard to the chair, which does not move. There must be at least two to 
make motion. If this whole universe is taken as a unit there is no motion; with 
regard to what should it move? Thus the Absolute is unchangeable and 
immovable, and all the movements and changes are only in the phenomenal 
world, the limited. That whole is Impersonal, and within this Impersonal are all 
these various persons beginning with the lowest atom, up to God, the Personal 
God, the Creator, the Ruler of the Universe, to whom we pray, before whom we 
kneel, and so on. Such a Personal God can be established with a great deal of 
reason. Such a Personal God is explicable as the highest manifestation of the 
Impersonal. You and I are very low manifestations, and the Personal God is the 
highest of which we can conceive. Nor can you or I become that Personal God. 
When the Vedanta says you and I are God, it does not mean the Personal God. 
To take an example. Out of a mass of clay a huge elephant of clay is 
manufactured, and out of the same clay, a little clay mouse is made. Would the 
clay mouse ever be able to become the clay elephant? But put them both in 


water and they are both clay; as clay they are both one, but as mouse and 
elephant there will be an eternal difference between them. The Infinite, the 
Impersonal, is like the clay in the example. We and the Ruler of the Universe 
are one, but as manifested beings, men, we are His eternal slaves. His 
worshippers. Thus we see that the Personal God remains. Everything else in this 
relative world remains, and religion is made to stand on a better foundation. 
Therefore it is necessary, that we first know the Impersonal in order to know the 
Personal. 

As we have seen, the law of reason says, the particular is only known through 
the general. So all these particulars, from man to God, are only known through 
the Impersonal, the highest generalization. Prayers will remain, only they will 
get a better meaning. All those senseless ideas of prayer the low stages of 
prayer, which are simply giving words to all sorts of silly desire in our minds, 
perhaps, will have to go. In all sensible religions, they never allow prayers to 
God; they allow prayers to gods. That is quite natural. The Roman Catholics 
pray to the saints; that is quite good. But to pray to God is senseless. To ask 
God to give you a breath of air, to send down a shower of rain, to make fruits 
grow in your garden, and so on, is quite unnatural. The saints, however, who 
were little beings like ourselves, may help us. But to pray to the Ruler of the 
Universe, prating every little need of ours, and from our childhood saying, "O 
Lord, I have a headache; let it go," is ridiculous. There have been millions of 
souls that have died in this world, and they are all here; they have become gods 
and angels; let them come to your help. But God! It cannot be. Unto Him we 
must go for higher things. A fool indeed is he who, resting on the banks of the 
Ganga, digs a little well for water; a fool indeed is he who, living near a mine of 
diamonds, digs for bits of crystal. 

And indeed we shall be fools if we go to the Father of all mercy. Father of all 
love, for trivial earthly things. Unto Him, therefore, we shall go for light, for 
strength, for love. But so long as there is weakness and a craving for servile 
dependence in us, there will be these little prayers and ideas of the worship of 
the Personal God. But those who are highly advanced do not care for such little 
helps, they have wellnigh forgotten all about this seeking things for themselves, 
wanting things for themselves. The predominant idea in them is — not I, but 
thou, my brother. Those are the fit persons to worship the Impersonal God. And 



what is the worship of the Impersonal God? No slavery there — "O Lord, I am 
nothing, have mercy on me." You know the old Persian poem, translated into 
English: "I came to see my beloved. The doors were closed. I knocked and a 
voice came from inside. 'Who art thou?' 'I am so-and-so' The door was not 
opened. A second time I came and knocked; I was asked the same question, and 
gave the same answer. The door opened not. I came a third time, and the same 
question came. I answered, 'I am thee, my love,' and the door opened." Worship 
of the Impersonal God is through truth. And what is truth? That I am He. When 
I say that I am not Thou, it is untrue. When I say I am separate from you it is a 
lie, a terrible lie. I am one with this universe, born one. It is self evident to my 
senses that I am one with the universe. I am one with the air that surrounds me, 
one with heat, one with light, eternally one with the whole Universal Being, 
who is called this universe, who is mistaken for the universe, for it is He and 
nothing else, the eternal subject in the heart who says, "I am," in every heart — 
the deathless one, the sleepless one, ever awake, the immortal, whose glory 
never dies, whose powers never fail. I am one with That. 

This is all the worship of the Impersonal, and what is the result ? The whole life 
of man will be changed. Strength, strength it is that we want so much in this 
life, for what we call sin and sorrow have all one cause, and that is our 
weakness. With weakness comes ignorance, and with ignorance comes misery. 
It will make us strong. Then miseries will be laughed at, then the violence of 
the vile will be smiled at, and the ferocious tiger will reveal, behind its tiger's 
nature, my own Self. That will be the result. That soul is strong that has become 
one with the Lord; none else is strong. In your own Bible, what do you think 
was the cause of that strength of Jesus of Nazareth, that immense, infinite 
strength which laughed at traitors, and blessed those that were willing to murder 
him? It was that, "I and my Father are one; it was that prayer, "Father, just as I 
am one With you, so make them all one with me." That is the worship of the 
Impersonal God. Be one with the universe, be one with Him. And this 
Impersonal God requires no demonstrations, no proofs. He is nearer to us than 
even our senses, nearer to us than our own thoughts; it is in and through Him 
that we see and think. To see anything, I must first see Him. To see this wall I 
first see Him, and then the wall, for He is the eternal subject. Who is seeing 
whom? He is here in the heart of our hearts. Bodies and minds change; misery, 
happiness, good and evil come and go; days and years roll on; life comes and 



goes; but He dies not. The same voice, "I am, I am," is eternal, unchangeable. In 
Him and through Him we know everything. In Him and through Him we see 
everything. In Him and through Him we sense, we think, we live, and we are. 
And that "I," which we mistake to be a little "I," limited, is not only my "I," but 
yours, the "I" of everyone, of the animals, of the angels, of the lowest of the 
low. That "I am" is the same in the murderer as in the saint, the same in the rich 
as in the poor, the same in man as in woman, the same in man as in animals. 
From the lowest amoeba to the highest angel. He resides in every soul, and 
eternally declares, "I am He, I am He." When we have understood that voice 
eternally present there, when we have learnt this lesson, the whole universe will 
have expressed its secret. Nature will have given up her secret to us. Nothing 
more remains to be known. Thus we find the truth for which all religions 
search, that all this knowledge of material sciences is but secondary. That is the 
only true knowledge which makes us one with this Universal God of the 
Universe. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

VEDANTA AS A FACTOR IN CIVILISATION 

{Extract from an address delivered at Airlie Lodge, Ridgeway Gardens, 

England) 

People who are capable of seeing only the gross external aspect of things can 
perceive in the Indian nation only a conquered and suffering people, a race of 
dreamers and philosophers. They seem to be incapable of perceiving that in the 
spiritual realm India conquers the world. No doubt it is true that just as the too 
active Western mind would profit by an admixture of Eastern introspect ion 
and the meditative habit, so the Eastern would benefit by a somewhat greater 
activity and energy. Still we must ask: What may be that force which causes 
this afflicted and suffering people, the Hindu, and the Jewish too (the two races 
from which have originated all the great religions of the world) to survive, 
when other nations perish? The cause can only be their spiritual force. The 
Hindus are still living though silent, the Jews are more numerous today than 
when they lived in Palestine. The philosophy of India percolates throughout the 
whole civilised world, modifying and permeating as it goes. So also in ancient 
times, her trade reached the shores of Africa before Europe was known, and 
opened communication with the rest of the world, thus disproving the belief 
that Indians never went outside of their own country. 

It is remarkable also that the possession of India by a foreign power has always 
been a turning-point in the history of that power, bringing to it wealth, 
prosperity, dominion, and spiritual ideas. While the Western man tries to 
measure how much it is possible for him to possess and to enjoy, the Eastern 
seems to take the opposite course, and to measure how little of material 
possessions he can do with. In the Vedas we trace the endeavour of that ancient 
people to find God. In their search for Him they came upon different strata; 
beginning with ancestor worship, they passed on to the worship of Agni, the 
fire-god, of Indra, the god of thunder, and of Varuna, the God of gods. We find 
the growth of this idea of God, from many gods to one God, in all religions; its 
real meaning is that He is the chief of the tribal gods, who creates the world, 
rules it, and sees into every heart; the stages of growth lead up from a 






multiplicity of gods to monotheism. This anthropomorphic conception, 
however, did not satisfy the Hindus, it was too human for them who were 
seeking the Divine. Therefore they finally gave up searching for God in the 
outer world of sense and matter, and turned their attention to the inner world. Is 

A. 

there an inner world? And what is it? It is Atman. It is the Self, it is the only 
thing an individual can be sure of. If he knows himself, he can know the 
universe, and not otherwise. The same question was asked in the beginning of 
time, even in the Rig-Veda, in another form: "Who or what existed from the 
beginning?" That question was gradually solved by the Vedanta philosophy. 
The Atman existed. That is to say, what we call the Absolute, the Universal 
Soul, the Self, is the force by which from the beginning all things have been 
and are and will be manifested. 

While the Vedanta philosophers solved that question, they at the same time 
discovered the basis of ethics. Though all religions have taught ethical 
precepts, such as, "Do not kill, do not injure; love your neighbour as yourself," 
etc., yet none of these has given the reason. Why should I not injure my 
neighbour? To this question there was no satisfactory or conclusive answer 
forthcoming, until it was evolved by the metaphysical speculations of the 
Hindus who could not rest satisfied with mere dogmas. So the Hindus say that 
this Atman is absolute and all-pervading, therefore infinite. There cannot be 
two infinites, for they would limit each other and would become finite. Also 
each individual soul is a part and parcel of that Universal Soul, which is 
infinite. Therefore in injuring his neighbour, the individual actually injures 
himself. This is the basic metaphysical truth underlying all ethical codes. It is 
too often believed that a person in his progress towards perfection passes from 
error to truth; that when he passes on from one thought to another, he must 
necessarily reject the first. But no error can lead to truth. The soul passing 
through its different stages goes from truth to truth, and each stage is true; it 
goes from lower truth to higher truth. This point may be illustrated in the 
following way. A man is journeying towards the sun and takes a photograph at 
each step. How different would be the first photograph from the second and 
still more from the third or the last, when he reaches the real sun! But all these, 
though differing so widely from each other, are true, only they are made to 
appear different by the changing conditions of time and space. It is the 
recognition of this truth, which has enabled the Hindus to perceive the 


universal truth of all religions, from the lowest to the highest; it has made of 
them the only people who never had religious persecutions. The shrine of a 
Mohammedan saint which is at the present day neglected and forgotten by 
Mohammedans, is worshipped by Hindus! Many instances may be quoted, 
illustrating the same spirit of tolerance. 

The Eastern mind could not rest satisfied till it had found that goal, which is the 
end sought by all humanity, namely. Unity. The Western scientist seeks for 
unity in the atom or the molecule. When he finds it, there is nothing further for 
him to discover, and so when we find that Unity of Soul or Self, which is called 
Atman, we can go no further. It becomes clear that everything in the sense 
world is a manifestation of that One Substance. Further, the scientist is brought 
to the necessity of recognising metaphysics, when he supposes that atoms 
having neither breadth nor length yet become, when combined, the cause of 
extension, length, and breadth. When one atom acts upon another, some 
medium is necessary. What is that medium? It will be a third atom. If so, then 
the question still remains unanswered, for how do these two act on the third? A 
manifest reductio ad absurdum. This contradiction in terms is also found in the 
hypothesis necessary to all physical science that a point is that which has 
neither parts nor magnitude, and a line has length without breadth. These 
cannot be either seen or conceived. Why? Because they do not come within the 
range of the senses. They are metaphysical conceptions. So we see, it is finally 
the mind which gives the form to all perception. When I see a chair, it is not the 
real chair external to my eye which I perceive, but an external something plus 
the mental image formed. Thus even the materialist is driven to metaphysics in 
the last extremity. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE SPIRIT AND INFLUENCE OF VEDANTA 

{Delivered at the Twentieth Century Club, Boston) 

Before going into the subject of this afternoon, will you allow me to say a few 
words of thanks, now that I have the opportunity? I have lived three years 
amongst you. I have travelled over nearly the whole of America, and as I am 
going back from here to my own country, it is meet that I should take this 
opportunity of expressing my gratitude in this Athens of America. When I first 
came to this country, after a few days I thought I would be able to write a book 
on the nation. But after three years' stay here, I find I am not able to write even 
a page. On the other hand, I find in travelling in various countries that beneath 
the surface differences that we find in dress and food and little details of 
manners, man is man all the world over; the same wonderful human nature is 
everywhere represented. Yet there are certain characteristics, and in a few 
words I would like to sum up all my experiences here. In this land of America, 
no question is asked about a man's peculiarities. If a man is a man, that is 
enough, and they take him into their hearts, and that is one thing I have never 
seen in any other country in the world. 

I came here to represent a philosophy of India, which is called the Vedanta 
philosophy. This philosophy is very, very ancient; it is the outcome of that 
mass of ancient Aryan literature known by the name of the Vedas. It is, as it 
were, the very flower of all the speculations and experiences and analyses, 
embodied in that mass of literature — collected and culled through centuries. 
This Vedanta philosophy has certain peculiarities. In the first place, it is 
perfectly impersonal; it does not owe its origin to any person or prophet: it does 
not build itself around one man as a centre. Yet it has nothing to say against 
philosophies which do build themselves around certain persons. In later days in 
India, other philosophies and systems arose, built around certain persons — 
such as Buddhism, or many of our present sects. They each have a certain 
leader to whom they owe allegiance, just as the Christians and Mohammedans 
have. But the Vedanta philosophy stands at the background of all these various 
sects, and there is no fight and no antagonism between the Vedanta and any 








other system in the world. 

One principle it lays down — and that, the Vedanta claims, is to be found in 
every religion in the world — that man is divine, that all this which we see 
around us is the outcome of that consciousness of the divine. Everything that is 
strong, and good, and powerful in human nature is the outcome of that divinity, 
and though potential in many, there is no difference between man and man 
essentially, all being alike divine. There is, as it were, an infinite ocean behind, 
and you and I are so many waves, coming out of that infinite ocean; and each 
one of us is trying his best to manifest that infinite outside. So, potentially, each 
one of us has that infinite ocean of Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss as our 
birthright, our real nature; and the difference between us is caused by the 
greater or lesser power to manifest that divine. Therefore the Vedanta lays 
down that each man should be treated not as what he manifests, but as what he 
stands for. Each human being stands for the divine, and, therefore, every 
teacher should be helpful, not by condemning man, but by helping him to call 
forth the divinity that is within him. 

It also teaches that all the vast mass of energy that we see displayed in society 
and in every plane of action is really from inside out; and, therefore, what is 
called inspiration by other sects, the Vedantist begs the liberty to call the 
expiration of man. At the same time it does not quarrel with other sects; the 
Vedanta has no quarrel with those who do not understand this divinity of man. 
Consciously or unconsciously, every man is trying to unfold that divinity. 

Man is like an infinite spring, coiled up in a small box, and that spring is trying 
to unfold itself; and all the social phenomena that we see the result of this 
trying to unfold. All the competitions and struggles and evils that we see 
around us are neither the causes of these unfoldments, nor the effects. As one 
of our great philosophers says — in the case of the irrigation of a field, the tank 
is somewhere upon a higher level, and the water is trying to rush into the field, 
and is barred by a gate. But as soon as the gate is opened, the water rushes in 
by its own nature; and if there is dust and dirt in the way, the water rolls over 
them. But dust and dirt are neither the result nor the cause of this unfolding of 
the divine nature of man. They are coexistent circumstances, and, therefore, 
can be remedied. 





Now, this idea, claims the Vedanta, is to be found in all religions, whether in 
India or outside of it; only, in some of them, the idea is expressed through 
mythology, and in others, through symbology. The Vedanta claims that there 
has not been one religious inspiration, one manifestation of the divine man, 
however great, but it has been the expression of that infinite oneness in human 
nature; and all that we call ethics and morality and doing good to others is also 
but the manifestation of this oneness. There are moments when every man feels 
that he is one with the universe, and he rushes forth to express it, whether he 
knows it or not. This expression of oneness is what we call love and sympathy, 
and it is the basis of all our ethics and morality. This is summed up in the 
Vedanta philosophy by the celebrated aphorism. Tat Tvam Asi, "Thou art 
That". 

To every man, this is taught: Thou art one with this Universal Being, and, as 
such, every soul that exists is your soul; and every body that exists is your 
body; and in hurting anyone, you hurt yourself, in loving anyone, you love 
yourself. As soon as a current of hatred is thrown outside, whomsoever else it 
hurts, it also hurts yourself; and if love comes out from you, it is bound to come 
back to you. For I am the universe; this universe is my body. I am the Infinite, 
only I am not conscious of it now; but I am struggling to get this consciousness 
of the Infinite, and perfection will be reached when full consciousness of this 
Infinite comes. 

Another peculiar idea of the Vedanta is that we must allow this infinite 
variation in religious thought, and not try to bring everybody to the same 
opinion, because the goal is the same. As the Vedantist says in his poetical 
language, "As so many rivers, having their source in different mountains, roll 
down, crooked or straight, and at last come into the ocean — so, all these 
various creeds and religions, taking their start from different standpoints and 
running through crooked or straight courses, at last come unto Thee." 

As a manifestation of that, we find that this most ancient philosophy has, 
through its influence, directly inspired Buddhism, the first missionary religion 
of the world, and indirectly, it has also influenced Christianity, through the 
Alexandrians, the Gnostics, and the European philosophers of the middle ages. 
And later, influencing German thought, it has produced almost a revolution in 


the regions of philosophy and psychology. Yet all this mass of influence has 
been given to the world almost unperceived. As the gentle falling of the dew at 
night brings support to all vegetable life, so, slowly and imperceptibly, this 
divine philosophy has been spread through the world for the good of mankind. 
No march of armies has been used to preach this religion. In Buddhism, one of 
the most missionary religions of the world, we find inscriptions remaining of 
tile great Emperor Asoka — recording how missionaries were sent to 
Alexandria, to Antioch, to Persia, to China, and to various other countries of 
the then civilised world. Three hundred years before Christ, instructions were 
given them not to revile other religions: "The basis of all religions is the same, 
wherever they are; try to help them all you can, teach them all you can, but do 
not try to injure them." 

Thus in India there never was any religious persecution by the Hindus, but only 
that wonderful reverence, which they have for all the religions of the world. 
They sheltered a portion of the Hebrews, when they were driven out of their 
own country; and the Malabar Jews remain as a result. They received at another 
time the remnant of the Persians, when they were almost annihilated; and they 
remain to this day, as a part of us and loved by us, as the modern Parsees of 
Bombay. There were Christians who claimed to have come with St. Thomas, 
the disciple of Jesus Christ; and they were allowed to settle in India and hold 
their own opinions; and a colony of them is even now in existence in India. 

And this spirit of toleration has not died out. It will not and cannot die there. 

This is one of the great lessons that the Vedanta has to teach. Knowing that, 
consciously or unconsciously, we are struggling to reach the same goal, why 
should we be impatient? If one man is slower than another, we need not be 
impatient, we need not curse him, or revile him. When our eyes are opened and 
the heart is purified, the work of the same divine influence, the unfolding of the 
same divinity in every human heart, will become manifest; and then alone we 
shall be in a position to claim the brotherhood of man. 

When a man has reached the highest, when he sees neither man nor woman, 
neither sect nor creed, nor colour, nor birth, nor any of these differentiations, 
but goes beyond and finds that divinity which is the real man behind every 
human being — then alone he has reached the universal brotherhood, and that 




man alone is a Vedantist. 


Such are some of the practical historical results of the Vedanta. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


STEPS OF HINDU PHILOSOPHIC THOUGHT 

The first group of religious ideas that we see coming up — I mean recognised 
religious ideas, and not the very low ideas, which do not deserve the name of 
religion — all include the idea of inspiration and revealed books and so forth. 
The first group of religious ideas starts with the idea of God. Here is the 
universe, and this universe is created by a certain Being. Everything that is in 
this universe has been created by Him. Along with that, at a later stage, comes 
the idea of soul — that there is this body, and something inside this body which 
is not the body. This is the most primitive idea of religion that we know. We 
can find a few followers of that in India, but it was given up very early. The 
Indian religions take a peculiar start. It is only by strict analysis, and much 
calculation and conjecture, that we can ever think that that stage existed in 
Indian religions. The tangible state in which we find them is the next step, not 
the first one. At the earliest step the idea of creation is very peculiar, and it is 
that the whole universe is created out of zero, at the will of God; that all this 
universe did not exist, and out of this nothingness all this has come. In the next 
stage we find this conclusion is questioned. How can existence be produced out 
of nonexistence? At the first step in the Vedanta this question is asked. If this 
universe is existent it must have come out of something, because it was very 
easy to see that nothing comes out of nothing, anywhere. All work that is done 
by human hands requires materials. If a house is built, the material was existing 
before; if a boat is made the material existed before; if any implements are 
made, the materials were existing before. So the effect is produced. Naturally, 
therefore, the first idea that this world was created out of nothing was rejected, 
and some material out of which this world was created was wanted. The whole 
history of religion, in fact, is this search after that material. 

Out of what has all this been produced? Apart from the question of the efficient 
cause, or God, apart from the question that God created the universe, the great 
question of all questions is: Out of what did He create it? All the philosophies 
are turning, as it were, on this question. One solution is that nature, God, and 
soul are eternal existences, as if three lines are running parallel eternally, of 
which nature and soul comprise what they call the dependent, and God the 








independent Reality. Every soul, like every particle of matter, is perfectly 
dependent on the will of God. Before going to the other steps we will take up 
the idea of soul, and then find that with all the Vedantic philosophers, there is 
one tremendous departure from all Western philosophy. All of them have a 
common psychology. Whatever their philosophy may have been, their 
psychology is the same in India, the old Sankhya psychology. According to 
this, perception occurs by the transmission of the vibrations which first come to 
the external sense-organs, from the external to the internal organs, from the 
internal organs to the mind, from the mind to the Buddhi, from the Buddhi or 

/V 

intellect, to something which is a unit, which they call the Atman. Coming to 
modern physiology, we know that it has found centres for all the different 
sensations. First it finds the lower centres, and then a higher grade of centres, 
and these two centres exactly correspond with the internal organs and the mind, 
but not one centre has been found which controls all the other centres. So 
physiology cannot tell what unifies all these centres. Where do the centres get 
united? The centres in the brain are all different, and there is not one centre 
which controls all the other centres; therefore, so far as it goes, the Indian 
psychology stands unchallenged upon this point. We must have this unification, 
something upon which the sensations will be reflected, to form a complete 
whole. Until there is that something, I cannot have any idea of you, or a 
picture, or anything else. If we had not that unifying something, we would only 
see, then after a while breathe, then hear, and so on, and while I heard a man 
talking I would not see him at all, because all the centres are different. 

This body is made of particles which we call matter, and it is dull and 
insentient. So is what the Vedantists call the fine body. The fine body, 
according to them, is a material but transparent body, made of very fine 
particles, so fine that no microscope can see them. What is the use of that? It is 
the receptacle of the fine forces. Just as this gross body is the receptacle of the 
gross forces, so the fine body is the receptacle of the fine forces, which we call 
thought, in its various modifications. First is the body, which is gross matter, 
with gross force. Force cannot exist without matter. It must require some matter 
to exist, so the grosser forces work in the body; and those very forces become 
finer; the very force which is working in a gross form, works in a fine form, 
and becomes thought. There is no distinction between them, simply one is the 
gross and the other the fine manifestation of the same thing. Neither is there 


any distinction between this fine body and the gross body. The fine body is also 
material, only very fine matter; and just as this gross body is the instrument that 
works the gross forces, so the fine body is the instrument that works the fine 
forces. From where do all these forces come? According to Vedanta 

A. 

philosophy, there are two things in nature, one of which they call Akasha, 
which is the substance, infinitely fine, and the other they call Prana, which is 
the force. Whatever you see, or feel, or hear, as air, earth, or anything is 
material — the product of Akasha. It goes on and becomes finer and finer, or 
grosser and grosser, changing under the action of Prana. Like Akasha, Prana is 
omnipresent, and interpenetrating everything. Akasha is like the water, and 
everything else in the universe is like blocks of ice, made out of that water, and 
floating in the water, and Prana is the power that changes this Akasha into all 
these various forms. The gross body is the instrument made out of Akasha, for 
the manifestation of Prana in gross forms, as muscular motion, or walking, 
sitting, talking, and so forth. That fine body is also made of Akasha, a very fine 
form of Akasha, for the manifestation of the same Prana in the finer form of 
thought. So, first there is this gross body. Beyond that is this fine body, and 
beyond that is the Jiva, the real man. Just as the nails can be pared off many 
times and yet are still part of our bodies, not different, so is our gross body 
related to the fine. It is not that a man has a fine and also a gross body; it is the 
one body only, the part which endures longer is the fine body, and that which 
dissolves sooner is the gross. Just as I can cut this nail any number of times, so, 
millions of times I can shed this gross body, but the fine body will remain. 
According to the dualists, this Jiva or the real man is very fine, minute. 

So far we see that man is a being, who has first a gross body which dissolves 
very quickly, then a fine body which remains through aeons, and then a Jiva. 
This Jiva, according to the Vedanta philosophy, is eternal, just as God is 
eternal. Nature is also eternal, but changefully eternal. The material of nature 
— Prana and Akasha — is eternal, but it is changing into different forms 
eternally. But the Jiva is not manufactured either of Akasha or Prana; it is 
immaterial and, therefore, will remain for ever. It is not the result of any 
combination of Prana and Akasha, and whatever is not the result of 
combination, will never be destroyed, because destruction is going back to 
causes. The gross body is a compound of Akasha and Prana and, therefore, will 
be decomposed The fine body will also be decomposed, after a long time, but 




the Jiva is simple, and will never be destroyed. It was never born for the same 
reason. Nothing simple can be born. The same argument applies. That which is 
a compound only can be born. The whole of nature comprising millions and 
millions of souls is under the will of God. God is all-pervading, omniscient, 
formless, and He is working through nature day and night. The whole of it is 
under His control. He is the eternal Ruler. So say the dualists. Then the 
question comes: If God is the ruler of this universe, why did He create such a 
wicked universe, why must we suffer so much? They say, it is not God's fault. 

It is our fault that we suffer. Whatever we sow we reap. He did not do anything 
to punish us. Man is born poor, or blind, or some other way. What is the 
reason? He had done something before, he was born that way. The Jiva has 
been existing for all time, was never created. It has been doing all sorts of 
things all the time. Whatever we do reacts upon us. If we do good, we shall 
have happiness, and if evil, unhappiness. So the Jiva goes on enjoying and 
suffering, and doing all sorts of things. 

What comes after death? All these Vedanta philosophers admit that this Jiva is 
by its own nature pure. But ignorance covers its real nature, they say. As by 
evil deeds it has covered itself with ignorance, so by good deeds it becomes 
conscious of its own nature again. Just as it is eternal, so its nature is pure. The 
nature of every being is pure. 

When through good deeds all its sins and misdeeds have been washed away, 
then the Jiva becomes pure again, and when it becomes pure, it goes to what is 
called Devayana. Its organ of speech enters the mind. You cannot think without 
words. Wherever there is thought, there must be words. As words enter the 
mind, so the mind is resolved into the Prana, and the Prana into the Jiva. Then 
the Jiva gets quickly out of the body, and goes to the solar regions. This 
universe has sphere after sphere. This earth is the world sphere, in which are 
moons, suns, and stars. Beyond that here is the solar sphere, and beyond that 
another which they call the lunar sphere. Beyond that there is the sphere which 
they call the sphere of lightning, the electric sphere, and when the Jiva goes 
there, there comes another Jiva, already perfect, to receive it, and takes it to 
another world, the highest heaven, called the Brahmaloka, where the Jiva lives 
eternally, no more to be born or to die. It enjoys through eternity, and gets all 
sorts of powers, except the power of creation. There is only one ruler of the 


universe, and that is God. No one can become God; the dualists maintain that if 
you say you are God, it is a blasphemy. All powers except the creative come to 
the Jiva, and if it likes to have bodies, and work in different parts of the world, 
it can do so. If it orders all the gods to come before it, if it wants its forefathers 
to come, they all appear at its command. Such are its powers that it never feels 
any more pain, and if it wants, it can live in the Brahmaloka through all 
eternity. This is the highest man, who has attained the love of God, who has 
become perfectly unselfish, perfectly purified, who has given up all desires, 
and who does not want to do anything except worship and love God. 

There are others that are not so high, who do good works, but want some 
reward. They say they will give so much to the poor, but want to go to heaven 
in return. When they die, what becomes of them? The speech enters the mind, 
the mind enters the Prana, the Prana enters the Jiva, and the Jiva gets out, and 
goes to the lunar sphere, where it has a very good time for a long period. There 
it enjoys happiness, so long as the effect of its good deeds endures. When the 
same is exhausted, it descends, and once again enters life on earth according to 
its desires. In the lunar sphere the Jiva becomes what we call a god, or what the 
Christians or Mohammedans call an angel. These gods are the names of certain 
positions; for instance, Indra, the king of the gods, is the name of a position; 
thousands of men get to that position. When a virtuous man who has performed 
the highest of Vedic rites dies, he becomes a king of the gods; by that time the 
old king has gone down again, and become man. Just as kings change here, so 
the gods, the Devas, also have to die. In heaven they will all die. The only 
deathless place is Brahmaloka, where alone there is no birth and death. 

So the Jivas go to heaven, and have a overly good time, except now and then 
when the demons Give them chase. In our mythology it is said there are 
demons, who sometimes trouble the gods. In all mythologies, you read how 
these demons and the gods fought, and the demons sometimes conquered the 
gods, although many times, it seems, the demons did not do so many wicked 
things as the gods. In all mythologies, for instance, you find the Devas fond of 
women. So after their reward is finished, they fall down again, come through 
the clouds, "through the rains, and thus get into some grain or plant and find 
their way into the human body, when the grain, or plant is eaten by men. The 
father gives them the material out of which to get a fitting body. When the 


material suits them no longer, they have to manufacture other bodies. Now 
there are the very wicked fellows, who do, all sorts of diabolical things; they 
are born again as animals, and if they are very bad, they are born as very low 
animals, or become plants, or stones. 

In the Deva form they make no Karma at all; only man makes Karma. Karma 
means work which will produce effect. When a man dies and becomes a Deva, 
he has only a period of pleasure, and during that time makes no fresh Karma; it 
is simply a reward for his past good Karma. When the good Karma is worked 
out, then the remaining Karma begins to take effect, and he comes dozen to 
earth. He becomes man again, and if he does very good works, and purifies 
himself, he goes to Brahmaloka and comes back no more. 

The animal is a state of sojourn for the Jiva evolving from lower forms. In 
course of time the animal becomes man. It is a significant fact that as the 
human population is increasing, the animal population is decreasing. The 
animal souls are all becoming men. So many species of animals have become 
men already. Where else have they gone? 

In the Vedas, there is no mention of hell. But our Puranas, the later books of 
our scriptures, thought that no religion could be complete, unless hells were 
attached to it, and so they invented all sorts of hells. In some of these, men are 
sawed in half, and continually tortured, but do not die. They are continually 
feeling intense pain, but the books are merciful enough to say it is only for a 
period. Bad Karma is worked out in that state and then they come back on 
earth, and get another chance. So this human form is the great chance. It is 
called the Karma-body, in which we decide our fate. We are running in a huge 
circle, and this is the point in the circle which determines the future. So this is 
considered the most important form that there is. Man is greater than the gods. 

So far with dualism, pure and simple. Next comes the higher Vedantic 
philosophy which says, that this cannot be. God is both the material and the 
efficient cause of this universe. If you say there is a God who is an infinite 
Being, and a soul which is also infinite, and a nature which is also infinite, you 
can go on multiplying infinites without limit which is simply absurd; you 
smash all logic. So God is both the material and the efficient cause of the 


universe; He projects this universe out of Himself. Then how is it that God has 
become these walls and this table, that God has become the pig, and the 
murderer, and all the evil things in the world? We say that God is pure. How 
can He become all these degenerate things? Our answer is: just as I am a soul 
and have a body, and in a sense, this body is not different from me, yet I, the 
real I, in fact, am not the body. For instance, I say, I am a child, a young man, 
or an old man, but my soul has not changed. It remains the same soul. 
Similarly, the whole universe, comprising all nature and an infinite number of 
souls, is, as it were, the infinite body of God. He is interpenetrating the whole 
of it. He alone is unchangeable, but nature changes, and soul changes. He is 
unaffected by changes in nature and soul. In what way does nature change? In 
its forms; it takes fresh forms. But the soul cannot change that way. The soul 
contracts and expands in knowledge. It contracts by evil deeds. Those deeds 
which contract the real natural knowledge and purity of the soul are called evil 
deeds. Those deeds, again, which bring out the natural glory of the soul, are 
called good deeds. All these souls were pure, but they have become contracted; 
through the mercy of God, and by doing good deeds, they will expand and 
recover their natural purity. Everyone has the same chance, and in the long run, 
must get out. But this universe will not cease, because it is eternal. This is the 
second theory. The first is called dualism. The second holds that there are God, 
soul, and nature, and soul and nature form the body of God, and, therefore, 
these three form one unit. It represents a higher stage of religious development 
and goes by the name of qualified monism. In dualism, the universe is 
conceived as a large machine set going by God while in qualified monism, it is 
conceived as an organism, interpenetrated by the Divine Self. 

The last are the non-dualists. They raise the question also, that God must be 
both the material and the efficient cause of this universe. As such, God has 
become the whole of this universe and there is no going against it. And when 
these other people say that God is the soul, and the universe is the body, and 
the body is changing, but God is changeless, the non-dualists say, all this is 
nonsense. In that case what is the use of calling God the material cause of this 
universe? The material cause is the cause become effect; the effect is nothing 
but the cause in another form. Wherever you see an effect, it is the cause 
reproduced. If the universe is the effect, and God the cause, it must be the 
reproduction of God. If you say that the universe is the body of God, and that 


the body becomes contracted and fine and becomes the cause, and out of that 
the universe is evolved, the non-dualists say that it is God Himself who has 
become this universe. Now comes a very fine question. If this God has become 
this universe, you and all these things are God. Certainly. This book is God, 
everything is God. My body is God, and my mind is God, and my soul is God. 
Then why are there so many Jivas? Has God become divided into millions of 
Jivas? Does that one God turn into millions of Jivas? Then how did it become 
so? How can that infinite power and substance, the one Being of the universe, 
become divided? It is impossible to divide infinity. How can that pure Being 
become this universe? If He has become the universe. He is changeful, and if 
He is changeful. He is part of nature, and whatever is nature and changeful is 
born and dies. If our God is changeful. He must die some day. Take note of 
that. Again, how much of God has become this universe ? If you say X (the 
unknown algebraical quantity), then God is God minus X now, and, therefore, 
not the same God as before this creation, because so much has become this 
universe. 

So the non-dualists say, "This universe does not exist at all; it is all illusion. 
The whole of this universe, these Devas, gods, angels, and all the other beings 
born and dying, all this infinite number of souls coming up and going down, 
are all dreams." There is no Jiva at all. How can there be many? It is the one 
Infinity. As the one sun, reflected on various pieces of water, appears to be 
many, and millions of globules of water reflect so many millions of suns, and 
in each globule will be a perfect image of the sun, yet there is only one sun, so 
are all these Jivas but reflections in different minds. These different minds are 
like so many different globules, reflecting this one Being. God is being 
reflected in all these different Jivas. But a dream cannot be without a reality, 
and that reality is that one Infinite Existence. You, as body, mind, or soul, are a 
dream, but what you really are, is Existence, Knowledge, Bliss. You are the 
God of this universe. You are creating the whole universe and drawing it in. 
Thus says the Advaitist. So all these births and rebirths, coming and going are 
the figments of Maya. You are infinite. Where can you go? The sun, the moon, 
and the whole universe are but drops in your transcendent nature. How can you 
be born or die? I never was born, never will be born. I never had father or 
mother, friends or foes, for I am Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute. I am 
He, I am He. So, what is the goal, according to this philosophy? That those 


who receive this knowledge are one with the universe. For them, all heavens 
and even Brahmaloka are destroyed, the whole dream vanishes, and they find 
themselves the eternal God of the universe. They attain their real individuality, 
with its infinite knowledge and bliss, and become free. Pleasures in little things 
cease. We are finding pleasure in this little body, in this little individuality. 

How much greater the pleasure when this whole universe is my body! If there 
is pleasure in one body, how much more when all bodies are mine! Then is 
freedom attained. And this is called Advaita, the non-dualistic Vedanta 
philosophy. 

These are the three steps which Vedanta philosophy has taken, and we cannot 
go any further, because we cannot go beyond unity. When a science reaches a 
unity, it cannot by any manner of means go any further. You cannot go beyond 
this idea of the Absolute. 

All people cannot take up this Advaita philosophy; it is hard. First of all, it is 
very hard to understand it intellectually. It requires the sharpest of intellects, a 
bold understanding. Secondly, it does not suit the vast majority of people. So 
there are these three steps. Begin with the first one. Then by thinking of that 
and understanding it, the second will open itself. Just as a race advances, so 
individuals have to advance. The steps which the human race has taken to reach 
to the highest pinnacles of religious thought, every individual will have to take. 
Only, while the human race took millions of years to reach from one step to 
another, individuals may live the whole life of the human race in a much 
shorter duration. But each one of us will have to go through these steps. Those 
of you who are non-dualists look back to the period of your lives when you 
were strong dualists. As soon as you think you are a body and a mind, you will 
have to take the whole of this dream. If you take one portion, you must take the 
whole. The man who says, here is this world, and there is no (Personal) God, is 
a fool; because if there is a world, there will have to be a cause, and that is what 
is called God. You cannot have an effect without knowing that there is a cause. 
God will only vanish when this world vanishes; then you will become God 
(Absolute), and this world will be no longer for you. So long as the dream that 
you are a body exists, you are bound to see yourself as being born and dying; 
but as soon as that dream vanishes, so will the dream vanish that you are being 
born and dying, and so will the other dream that there is a universe vanish. That 


very thing which we now see as the universe will appear to us as God 
(Absolute), and that very God who has so long been external will appear to be 
internal, as our own Self. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


STEPS TO REALISATION 

(A class-lecture delivered in America) 

First among the qualifications required of the aspirant for Jnana, or wisdom, 
come Shama and Dama, which may be taken together. They mean the keeping 
of the organs in their own centres without allowing them to stray out. I shall 
explain to you first what the word "organ" means. Here are the eyes; the eyes 
are not the organs of vision but only the instruments. Unless the organs also are 
present, I cannot see, even if I have eyes. But, given both the organs and the 
instruments, unless the mind attaches itself to these two, no vision takes place. 
So, in each act of perception, three things are necessary — first, the external 
instruments, then, the internal organs, and lastly, the mind. If any one of them 
be absent, then there will be no perception. Thus the mind acts through two 
agencies —one external, and the other internal. When I see things, my mind 
goes out, becomes externalised; but suppose I close my eyes and begin to think, 
the mind does not go out, it is internally active. But, in either case, there is 
activity of the organs. When I look at you and speak to you, both the organs 
and the instruments are active. When I close my eyes and begin to think, the 
organs are active, but not the instruments. Without the activity of these organs, 
there will be no thought. You will find that none of you can think without some 
symbol. In the case of the blind man, he has also to think through some figure. 
The organs of sight and hearing are generally very active. You must bear in 
mind that by the word "organ" is meant the nerve centre in the brain. The eyes 
and ears are only the instruments of seeing and hearing, and the organs are 
inside. If the organs are destroyed by any means, even if the eyes or the ears be 
there, we shall not see or hear. So in order to control the mind, we must first be 
able to control these organs. To restrain the mind from wandering outward or 
inward, and keep the organs in their respective centres, is what is meant by the 
words Shama and Dama. Shama consists in not allowing the mind to 
externalise, and Dama, in checking the external instruments. 

Now comes Uparati which consists in not thinking of things of the senses. Most 
of our time is spent in thinking about sense-objects, things which we have seen. 







or we have heard, which we shall see or shall hear, things which we have eaten, 
or are eating, or shall eat, places where we have lived, and so on. We think of 
them or talk of them most of our time. One who wishes to be a Vedantin must 
give up this habit. 

Then comes the next preparation (it is a hard task to be a philosopher!), 
Titiksha, the most difficult of all. It is nothing less than the ideal forbearance — 
"Resist not evil." This requires a little explanation. We may not resist an evil, 
but at the same time we may feel very miserable. A man may say very harsh 
things to me, and I may not outwardly hate him for it, may not answer him 
back, and may restrain myself from apparently getting angry, but anger and 
hatred may be in my mind, and I may feel very badly towards that man. That is 
not non-resistance; I should be without any feeling of hatred or anger, without 
any thought of resistance; my mind must then be as calm as if nothing had 
happened. And only when I have got to that state, have I attained to non- 
resistance, and not before. Forbearance of all raisers, without even a thought of 
resisting or driving it out, without even any painful feeling in the mind, or any 
remorse — this is Titiksha. Suppose I do not resist, and some great evil comes 
thereby; if I have Titiksha, I should no feel any remorse for not having resisted. 
When the mind has attained to that state, it has become established in Titiksha. 
People in India do extraordinary things in order to practice this Titiksha. They 
bear tremendous heat and cold without caring, they do not even care for snow, 
because they take no thought for the body; it is left to itself, as if it were a 
foreign thing. 

The next qualification required is Shraddha, faith. One must have tremendous 
faith in religion and God. Until one has it, one cannot aspire to be a Jnani. A 
great sage once told me that not one in twenty millions in this world believed in 
God. I asked him why, and he told me, "Suppose there is a thief in this room, 
and he gets to know that there is a mass of gold in the next room, and only a 
very thin partition between the two rooms; what will be the condition of that 
thief?" I answered, "He will not be able to sleep at all; his brain will be actively 
thinking of some means of getting at the gold, and he will think of nothing 
else." Then he replied, "Do you believe that a man could believe in God and 
not go mad to get him? If a man sincerely believes that there is that immense, 
infinite mine of Bliss, and that It can be reached, would not that man go mad in 




his struggle to reach it ?" Strong faith in God and the consequent eagerness to 
reach Him constitute Shraddha. 

Then comes SamMhana, or constant practice, to hold the mind in God. Nothing 
is done in a day. Religion cannot be swallowed in the form of a pill. It requires 
hard and constant practice. The mind can be conquered only by slow and 
steady practice. 

Next is Mumukshutva, the intense desire to be free. Those of you who have 
read Edwin Arnold's Light of Asia remember his translation of the first sermon 
of Buddha, where Buddha says. 

Ye suffer from yourselves. None else compels. 

None other holds you that ye live and die. 

And whirl upon the wheel, and hug and kiss 
Its spokes of agony. 

Its tire of tears, its nave of nothingness. 

All the misery we have is of our own choosing; such is our nature. The old 
Chinaman, who having been kept in prison for sixty years was released on the 
coronation of a new emperor, exclaimed, when he came out, that he could not 
live; he must go back to his horrible dungeon among the rats and mice; he 
could not bear the light. So he asked them to kill him or send him back to the 
prison, and he was sent back. Exactly similar is the condition of all men. We 
run headlong after all sorts of misery, and are unwilling to be freed from them. 
Every day we run after pleasure, and before we reach it, we find it is gone, it 
has slipped through our fingers. Still we do not cease from our mad pursuit, but 
on and on we go, blinded fools that we are. 

In some oil mills in India, bullocks are used that go round and round to grind 
the oil-seed. There is a yoke on the bullock's neck. They have a piece of wood 
protruding from the yoke, and on that is fastened a wisp of straw. The bullock 
is blindfolded in such a way that it can only look forward, and so it stretches its 
neck to get at the straw; and in doing so, it pushes the piece of wood out a little 
further; and it makes another attempt with the same result, and yet another, and 
so on. It never catches the straw, but goes round and round in the hope of 


getting it, and in so doing, grinds out the oil. In the same way you and who are 
born slaves to nature, money and wealth, wives and children, are always 
chasing a wisp of straw, a mere chimera, and are going through an innumerable 
round of lives without obtaining what we seek. The great dream is love; we are 
all going to love and be loved, we are all going to be happy and never meet 
with misery, but the more we go towards happiness, the more it goes away 
from us. Thus the world is going on, society goes on, and we, blinded slaves, 
have to pay for it Without knowing. Study your own lives, and find how little 
of happiness there is in them, and how little in truth you have gained in the 
course of this wild-goose chase of the world. 

Do you remember the story of Solon and Croesus? The king said to the great 
sage that Asia Minor was a very happy place. And the sage asked him, "Who is 
the happiest man? I have not seen anyone very happy." "Nonsense," said 
Croesus, "I am the happiest man in the world." "Wait, sir, till the end of your 
life; don't be in a hurry," replied the sage and went away. In course of time that 
king was conquered by the Persians, and they ordered him to be burnt alive. 

The funeral pyre was prepared and when poor Croesus saw it, he cried aloud 
"Solon! Solon!" On being asked to whom he referred, he told his story, and the 
Persian emperor was touched, and saved his life. 

Such is the life story of each one of us; such is the tremendous power of nature 
over us. It repeatedly kicks us away, but still we pursue it with feverish 
excitement. We are always hoping against hope; this hope, this chimera 
maddens us; we are always hoping for happiness. 

There was a great king in ancient India who was once asked four questions, of 
which one was: "What is the; most wonderful thing in the world?" "Hope," was 
the answer. This is the most wonderful thing. Day and nights we see people 
dying around us, and yet we think we shall not die; we never think that we shall 
die, or that we shall suffer. Each man thinks that success will be his, hoping 
against hope, against all odds, against all mathematical reasoning. Nobody is 
ever really happy here. If a man be wealthy and have plenty to eat, his 
digestion is: out of order, and he cannot eat. If a man's digestion be good, and 
he have the digestive power of a cormorant, he has nothing to put into his 
mouth. If he be rich, he has no children. If he be hungry and poor, he has a 


whole regiment of children, and does not know what to do with them. Why is it 
so? Because happiness and misery are the obverse and reverse of the same 
coin; he who takes happiness, must take misery also. We all have this foolish 
idea that we can have happiness without misery, and it has taken such 
possession of us that we have no control over the senses. 

When I was in Boston, a young man came up to me, and gave me a scrap of 
paper on which he had written a name and address, followed by these words: 
"All the wealth and all the happiness of the world are yours, if you only know 
how to get them. If you come to me, I will teach you how to get them. Charge, 

$ 5." He gave me this and said, "What do you think of this?" I said, "Young 
man, why don't you get the money to print this? You have not even enough 
money to get this printed !" He did not understand this. He was infatuated with 
the idea that he could get immense wealth and happiness without any trouble. 
There are two extremes into which men are running; one is extreme optimism, 
when everything is rosy and nice and good; the other, extreme pessimism, 
when everything seems to be against them. The majority of men have more or 
less undeveloped brains. One in a million we see with a well-developed brain; 
the rest either have peculiar idiosyncrasies, or are monomaniacs. 

Naturally we run into extremes. When we are healthy and young, we think that 
all the wealth of the world will be ours, and when later we get kicked about by 
society like footballs and get older, we sit in a corner and croak and throw cold 
water on the enthusiasm of others. Few men know that with pleasure there is 
pain, and with pain, pleasure; and as pain is disgusting, so is pleasure, as it is 
the twin brother of pain. It is derogatory to the glory of man that he should be 
going after pain, and equally derogatory, that he should be going after pleasure. 
Both should be turned aside by men whose reason is balanced. Why will not 
men seek freedom from being played upon? This moment we are whipped, and 
when we begin to weep, nature gives us a dollar; again we are whipped, and 
when we weep, nature gives us a piece of ginger-bread, and we begin to laugh 
again. 

The sage wants liberty; he finds that sense-objects are all vain and that there is 
no end to pleasures and pains. How many rich people in the world want to find 
fresh pleasures! All pleasures are old, and they want new ones. Do you not see 


how many foolish things they are inventing every day, just to titillate the nerves 
for a moment, and that done, how there comes a reaction? The majority of 
people are just like a flock of sheep. If the leading sheep falls into a ditch, all 
the rest follow and break their necks. In the same way, what one leading 
member of a society does, all the others do, without thinking what they are 
doing. When a man begins to see the vanity of worldly things, he will feel he 
ought not to be thus played upon or borne along by nature. That is slavery. If a 
man has a few kind words said to him, he begins to smile, and when he hears a 
few harsh words, he begins to weep. He is a slave to a bit of bread, to a breath 
of air; a slave to dress, a slave to patriotism, to country, to name, and to fame. 
He is thus in the midst of slavery and the real man has become buried within, 
through his bondage. What you call man is a slave. When one realises all this 
slavery, then comes the desire to be free; an intense desire comes. If a piece of 
burning charcoal be placed on a man's head, see how he struggles to throw it 
off. Similar will be the struggles for freedom of a man who really understands 
that he is a slave of nature. 

We have now seen what Mumukshutva, or the desire to be free, is. The next 
training is also a very difficult one. Nityanitya-Viveka — discriminating 
between that which is true and that which is untrue, between the eternal and the 
transitory. God alone is eternal, everything else is transitory. Everything dies; 
the angels die, men die, animals die, earths die, sun, moon, and stars, all die; 
everything undergoes constant change. The mountains of today were the 
oceans of yesterday and will be oceans tomorrow. Everything is in a state of 
flux. The whole universe is a mass of change. But there is One who never 
changes, and that is God; and the nearer we get to Him, the less will be the 
change for us, the less will nature be able to work on us; and when we reach 
Him, and stand with Him, we shall conquer nature, we shall be masters of 
phenomena of nature, and they will have no effect on us. 

You see, if we really have undergone the above discipline, we really do not 
require anything else in this world. All knowledge is within us. All perfection 
is there already in the soul. But this perfection has been covered up by nature; 
layer after layer of nature is covering this purity of the soul. What have we to 
do? Really we do not develop our souls at all. What can develop the perfect? 
We simply take the evil off; and the soul manifests itself in its pristine purity. 



its natural, innate freedom. 


Now begins the inquiry: Why is this discipline so necessary? Because religion 
is not attained through the ears, nor through the eyes, nor yet through the brain. 
No scriptures can make us religious. We may study all the books that are in the 
world, yet we may not understand a word of religion or of God. We may talk 
all our lives and yet may not be the better for it; we may be the most 
intellectual people the world ever saw, and yet we may not come to God at all. 
On the other hand, have you not seen what irreligious men have been produced 
from the most intellectual training? It is one of the evils of your Western 
civilisation that you are after intellectual education alone, and take no care of 
the heart. It only makes men ten times more selfish, and that will be your 
destruction. When there is conflict between the heart and the brain, let the heart 
be followed, because intellect has only one state, reason, and within that, 
intellect works, and cannot get beyond. It is the heart which takes one to the 
highest plane, which intellect can never reach; it goes beyond intellect, and 
reaches to what is called inspiration. Intellect can never become inspired; only 
the heart when it is enlightened, becomes inspired. An intellectual, heartless 
man never becomes an inspired man. It is always the heart that speak in the 
man of love; it discovers a greater instrument ton intellect can give you, the 
instrument of inspiration, lost as the intellect is the instrument of knowledge, so 
is the heart the instrument of inspiration. In a lower state it is a much weaker 
instrument than intellect. An ignorant man knows nothing, but he is a little 
emotional by nature. Compare him with a great professor — what wonderful 
power the latter possesses! But the professor is bond by his intellect, and he can 
be a devil and an intellectual man at the same time; but the man of heart can 
never be a devil; no man with emotion was ever a devil. Properly cultivated, 
the heart can be changed, and will go beyond intellect; it will be changed into 
inspiration. Man will have to go beyond intellect in the end. The knowledge of 
man, his powers of perception, of reasoning ad intellect and heart, all are busy 
churning this milk if the world. Out of long churning comes butter, and this 
butter is God. Men of heart get the "butter", and he "buttermilk" is left for the 
intellectual. 

These are all preparations for the heart, for that love, for that intense sympathy 
appertaining to the heart. It is not at all necessary to be educated or learned to 



get to God. A sage once told me, "To kill others one must be equipped with 
swords and shields, but to commit suicide a needle is sufficient; so to teach 
others, much intellect and learning are necessary, but not so for your own self¬ 
illumination." Are on pure? If you are pure, you will reach God. "Blessed are 
the pure in heart, for they shall see God." If you are not pure, and you know all 
the sciences in the world, that will not help you at all; you may be buried in all 
the books you read, but that will not be of much use. It is the heart that reaches 
the goal. Follow the heart. A pure heart sees beyond the intellect; it gets 
inspired; it knows things that reason can never know, and whenever there is 
conflict between the pure heart and the intellect, always side with the pure 
heart, even if you think what your heart is doing is unreasonable. When it is 
desirous of doing good to others, your brain may tell you that it is not politic to 
do so, but follow your heart, and you will find that you make less mistakes than 
by following your intellect. The pure heart is the best mirror for the reflection 
of truth, so all these disciplines are for the purification of the heart. And as 
soon as it is pure, all truths flash upon it in a minute; all truth in the universe 
will manifest in your heart, if you are sufficiently pure. 

The great truths about atoms, and the finer elements, and the fine perceptions 
of men, were discovered ages ago by men who never saw a telescope, or a 
microscope, or a laboratory. How did they know all these things? It was 
through the heart; they purified the heart. It is open to us to do the same today; 
it is the culture of the heart, really, and not that of the intellect that will lessen 
the misery of the world. 

Intellect has been cultured with tile result that hundreds of sciences have been 
discovered, and their effect has been that the few have made slaves of the many 
— that is all the good that has been done. Artificial wants have been created; 
and every poor man, whether he has money or not, desires to have those wants 
satisfied, and when he cannot, he struggles, and dies in tile struggle. This is the 
result. Through the intellect is not the way to solve the problem of misery, but 
through the heart. If all this vast amount of effort had been spent in making 
men purer, gentler, more forbearing, this world would have a thousandfold 
more happiness than it has today. Always cultivate the heart; through the heart 
the Lord speaks, and through the intellect you yourself speak. 



You remember in the Old Testament where Moses was told, "Take off thy 
shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground." 

We must always approach the study of religion with that reverent attitude. He 
who comes with a pure heart and a reverent attitude, his heart will be opened; 
the doors will open for him, and he will see the truth. 

If you come with intellect only, you can have a little intellectual gymnastics, 
intellectual theories, but not truth. Truth has such a face that any one who sees 
that face becomes convinced. The sun does not require any torch to show it; the 
sun is self-effulgent. If truth requires evidence, what will evidence that 
evidence? If something is necessary as witness for truth, where is the witness 
for that witness? We must approach religion with reverence and with love, and 
our heart will stand up and say, this is truth, and this is untruth. 

The field of religion is beyond our senses, beyond even our consciousness. We 
cannot sense God. Nobody has seen God with his eyes or ever will see; nobody 
has God in his consciousness. I am not conscious of God, nor you, nor 
anybody. Where is God? Where is the field of religion? It is beyond the senses, 
beyond consciousness. Consciousness is only one of the many planes in which 
we work; you will have to transcend the field of consciousness, to go beyond 
the senses, approach nearer and nearer to your own centre, and as you do that, 
you will approach nearer and nearer to God. What is the proof of God? Direct 
perception, Pratyaksha. The proof of this wall is that I perceive it. God has 
been perceived that way by thousands before, and will be perceived by all who 
want to perceive Him. But this perception is no sense-perception at all; it is 
supersensuous, superconscious, and all this training is needed to take us beyond 
the senses. By means of all sorts of past work and bandages we are being 
dragged downwards; these preparations will make us pure and light. Bondages 
will fall off by themselves, and we shall be buoyed up beyond this plane of 
sense-perception to which we are tied down, and then we shall see, and hear, 
and feel things which men in the three ordinary states (viz waking, dream, and 
sleep) neither feel, nor see, nor hear. Then we shall speak a strange language, 
as it were, and the world will not understand us, because it does not know 
anything but the senses. True religion is entirely transcendental. Every being 
that is in the universe has the potentiality of transcending the senses; even the 
little worm will one day transcend the senses and reach God. No life will be a 


failure; there is no such thing as failure in the universe. A hundred times man 
will hurt himself, a thousand times he will tumble, but in the end he will realise 
that he is God. We know there is no progress in a straight line. Every soul 
moves, as it were, in a circle, and will have to complete it, and no soul can go 
so low but there will come a time when it will have to go upwards. No one will 
be lost. We are all projected from one common centre, which is God. The 
highest as well as the lowest life God ever projected, will come back to the 
Father of all lives. "From whom all beings are projected, in whom all live, and 
unto whom they all return; that is God." 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


VEDANTA AND PRIVILEGE 

{Delivered in London) 

We have nearly finished the metaphysical portion of the Advaita. One point, 
and perhaps the most difficult to understand, remains. We have seen so far that, 
according to the Advaita theory, all we see around us, and the whole universe 
in fact, is the evolution of that one Absolute. This is called, in Sanskrit, 
Brahman. The Absolute has become changed into the whole of nature. But here 
comes a difficulty. How is it possible for the Absolute to change? What made 
the Absolute to change? By its very definition, the Absolute is unchangeable. 
Change of the unchangeable would be a contradiction. The same difficulty 
applies to those who believe in a Personal God. For instance, how did this 
creation arise? It could not have arisen out of nothing; that would be a 
contradiction — something coming out of nothing can never be. The effect is 
the cause in another form. Out of the seed, the big tree grows; the tree is the 
seed, plus air and water taken in. And if there were any method of testing the 
amount of the air, and water taken to make the body of the tree, we should find 
that it is exactly the same as the effect, the tree. Modern science has proved 
beyond doubt that it is so, that the cause is the effect in another form. The 
adjustment of the parts of the cause changes and becomes the effect. So, we 
have to avoid this difficulty of having a universe without a cause, and we are 
bound to admit that God has become the universe. 

But we have avoided one difficulty, and landed in another. In every theory, the 
idea of God comes through the idea of unchangeability. We have traced 
historically how the one idea which we have always in mind in the search for 
God, even in its crudest form, is the idea of freedom; and the idea of freedom 
and of unchangeability is one and the same. It is the free alone which never 
changes, and the unchangeable alone which is free; for change is produced by 
something exterior to a thing, or within itself, which is more powerful than the 
surroundings. Everything which can be changed is necessarily bound by certain 
cause or causes, which cannot be unchangeable. Supposing God has become 
this universe, then God is here and has changed. And suppose the Infinite has 







become this finite universe, so much of the Infinite has gone, and, therefore, 
God is Infinite minus the universe. A changeable God would be no God. To 
avoid this doctrine of pantheism, there is a very bold theory of the Vedanta. It 
is that this universe, as we know and think it, does not exist, that the 
unchangeable has not changed, that the whole of this universe is mere 
appearance and not reality, that this idea of parts, and little beings, and 
differentiations is only apparent, not the nature of the thing itself. God has not 
changed at all, and has not become the universe at all. We see God as the 
universe, because we have to look through time, space, and causation. It is 
time, space, and causation that make this differentiation apparently, but not 
really. This is a very bold theory indeed. Now this theory ought to be explained 
a little more clearly. It does not mean idealism in the sense in which it is 
generally understood. It does not say that this universe does not exist; it exists, 
but at the same time it is not what we take it for. To illustrate this, the example 
given by the Advaita philosophy is well known. In the darkness of night, a 
stump of a tree is looked upon as a ghost by some superstitious person, as a 
policeman by a robber, as a friend by some one waiting for his companion. In 
all these cases, the stump of the tree did not change, but there are apparent 
changes, and these changes were in the minds of those who saw it. From the 
subjective side we can understand it better through psychology. There is 
something outside of ourselves, the true nature of which is unknown and 
unknowable to us; let us call it x. And there is something inside, which is also 
unknown and unknowable to us; let us call it y. The knowable is a combination 
of X plus y, and everything that we know, therefore, must have two parts, the x 
outside, and the y inside; and the x plus y is the thing we know. So, every form 
in the universe is partly our creation and partly something outside. Now what 
the Vedanta holds is that this x and this y are one and the same. 

A very similar conclusion has been arrived at by some western philosophers, 
especially by Herbert Spencer, and some other modern philosophers. When it is 
said that the same power which is manifesting itself in the flower is welling up 
in my own consciousness, it is the very same idea which the Vedantist wants to 
preach, that the reality of the external world and the reality of the internal 
world are one and the same. Even the ideas of the internal and external exist by 
differentiation and do not exist in the things themselves. For instance, if we 
develop another sense, the whole world will change for us, showing that it is 


the subject which will change the object. If I change, the external world 
changes. The theory of the Vedanta, therefore, comes to this, that you and I and 
everything in the universe are that Absolute, not parts, but the whole. You are 
the whole of that Absolute, and so are all others, because the idea of part 
cannot come into it. These divisions, these limitations, are only apparent, not in 
the thing itself. I am complete and perfect, and I was never bound, boldly 
preaches the Vedanta. If you think you are bound, bound you will remain; if 
you know that you are free, free you are. Thus the end and aim of this 
philosophy is to let us know that we have been free always, and shall remain 
free for ever. We never change, we never die, and we are never born. What are 
all these changes then? What becomes of this phenomenal world? This world is 
admitted as an apparent world, bound by time, space, and causation, and it 
comes to what is called the Vivarta-vMa in Sanskrit, evolution of nature, and 
manifestation of the Absolute. The Absolute does not change, or re-evolve. In 
the little amoeba is that infinite perfection latent. It is called amoeba from its 
amoeba covering, and from the amoeba to the perfect man the change is not in 
what is inside — that remains the same, unchangeable — but the change occurs 
in the covering. 

There is a screen here, and some beautiful scenery outside. There is a small 
hole in the screen through which we can only catch a glimpse of it. Suppose 
this hole begins to increase; as it grows larger and larger, more and more of the 
scenery comes into view, and when the screen has vanished, we come face to 
face with the whole of the scenery. This scene outside is the soul, and the 
screen between us and the scenery is Maya — time, space, and causation. 

There is a little hole somewhere, through which I can catch only a glimpse of 
the soul. When the hole is bigger, I see more and more, and when the screen 
has vanished, I know that I am the soul. So changes in the universe are not in 
the Absolute; they are in nature. Nature evolves more and more, until the 
Absolute manifests Itself. In everyone It exists; in some It is manifested more 
than in others. The whole universe is really one. In speaking of the soul, to say 
that one is superior to another has no meaning. In speaking of the soul, to say 
that man is superior to the animal or the plant, has no meaning; the whole 
universe is one. In plants the obstacle to soul-manifestation is very great; in 
animals a little less; and in man still less; in cultured, spiritual men still less; 
and in perfect men, it has vanished altogether. All our struggles, exercises. 



pains, pleasures, tears, and smiles, all that we do and think tend towards that 
goal, the tearing up of the screen, making the hole bigger, thinning the layers 
that remain between the manifestation and the reality behind. Our work, 
therefore, is not to make the soul free, but to get rid of the bandages. The sun is 
covered by layers of clouds, but remains unaffected by them. The work of the 
wind is to drive the clouds away, and the more the clouds disappear, the more 
the light of the sun appears. There is no change whatsoever in the soul — 
Infinite, Absolute, Eternal, Knowledge, Bliss, and Existence. Neither can there 
be birth or death for the soul. Dying, and being born, reincarnation, and going 
to heaven, cannot be for the soul. These are different appearances, different 
mirages, different dreams. If a man who is dreaming of this world now dreams 
of wicked thoughts and wicked deeds, after a certain time the thought of that 
very dream will produce the next dream. He will dream that he is in a horrible 
place, being tortured. The man who is dreaming good thoughts and good deeds, 
after that period of dream is over, will dream he is in a better place; and so on 
from dream to dream. But the time will come when the whole of this dream 
will vanish. To everyone of us there must come a time when the whole 
universe will be found to have been a mere dream, when we shall find that the 
soul is infinitely better than its surroundings. In this struggle through what we 
call our environments, there will come a time when we shall find that these 
environments were almost zero in comparison with the power of the soul. It is 
only a question of time, and time is nothing in the Infinite. It is a drop in the 
ocean. We can afford to wait and be calm. 

Consciously or unconsciously, therefore, the whole universe is going towards 
that goal. The moon is struggling to get out of the sphere of attraction of other 
bodies, and will come out of it, in the long run. But those who consciously 
strive to get free hasten the time. One benefit from this theory we practically 
see is that the idea of a real universal love is only possible from this point of 
view. All are our fellow passengers, our fellow travellers — all life, plants, 
animals; not only my brother man, but my brother brute, my brother plant; not 
only my brother the good, but my brother the evil, my brother the spiritual and 
my brother the wicked. They are all going to the same goal. All are in the same 
stream, each is hurrying towards that infinite freedom. We cannot stay the 
course, none can stay it, none can go back, however he may try; he will be 
driven forward, and in the end he will attain to freedom. Creation means the 


struggle to get back to freedom, the centre of our being, whence we have been 
thrown off, as it were. The very fact that we are here, shows that we are going 
towards the centre, and the manifestation of this attraction towards the centre is 
what we call love. 

The question is asked: From what does this universe come, in what does it 
remain, to what does it go back? And the answer is: From love it comes, in love 
it remains, back it goes unto love. Thus we are in a position to understand that, 
whether one likes it or not, there is no going back for anyone. Everyone has to 
get to the centre, however he may struggle to go back. Yet if we struggle 
consciously, knowingly, it will smooth the passage, it will lessen the jar, and 
quicken the time. Another conclusion we naturally arrive at from this is that all 
knowledge and all power are within and not without. What we call nature is a 
reflecting glass — that is all the use of nature — and all knowledge is this 
reflection of the within on this glass of nature. What we call powers, secrets of 
nature, and force, are all within. In the external world are only a series of 
changes. There is no knowledge in nature; all knowledge comes from the 
human soul. Man manifests knowledge, discovers it within himself, which is 
pre-existing through eternity. Everyone is the embodiment of Knowledge, 
everyone is the embodiment of eternal Bliss, and eternal Existence. The ethical 
effect is just the same, as we have seen elsewhere, with regard to equality. 

But the idea of privilege is the bane of human life. Two forces, as it were, are 
constantly at work one making caste, and the other breaking caste; in other 
words, the one making for privilege, the other breaking down privilege. And 
whenever privilege is broken down, more and more light and progress come to 
a race. This struggle we see all around us. Of course there is first the brutal idea 
of privilege, that of the strong over the weak. There is the privilege of wealth. 

If a man has more money than another, he wants a little privilege over those 
who have less. There is the still subtler and more powerful privilege of 
intellect; because one man knows more than others, he claims more privilege. 
And the last of all, and the worst, because the most tyrannical, is the privilege 
of spirituality. If some persons think they know more of spirituality, of God, 
they claim a superior privilege over everyone else. They say, "Come down and 
worships us, ye common herds; we are the messengers of God, and you have to 
worship us." None can be Vedantists, and at the same time admit of privilege to 



anyone, either mental, physical, or spiritual; absolutely no privilege for anyone. 
The same power is in every man, the one manifesting more, the other less; the 
same potentiality is in everyone. Where is the claim to privilege? All 
knowledge is in every soul, even in the most ignorant; he has not manifested it, 
but, perhaps, he has not had the opportunity, the environments were not, 
perhaps, suitable to him. When he gets the opportunity, he will manifest it. The 
idea that one man is born superior to another has no meaning in the Vedanta; 
that between two nations one is superior and the other inferior has no meaning 
whatsoever. Put them in the same circumstances, and see whether the same 
intelligence comes out or not. Before that you have no right to say that one 
nation is superior to another. And as to spirituality, no privilege should be 
claimed there. It is a privilege to serve mankind, for this is the worship of God. 
God is here, in all these human souls. He is the soul of man. What privilege can 
men ask? There are no special messengers of God, never were, and never can 
be. All beings, great or small, are equally manifestations of God; the difference 
is only in the manifestation, same eternal message, which has been eternally 
given, comes to them little by little. The eternal message has been written in the 
heart of every being; it is there already, and all are struggling to express it. 
Some, in suitable circumstances, express it a little better than others, but as 
bearers of the message they are all one. What claim to superiority is there? The 
most ignorant man, the most ignorant child, is as great a messenger of God as 
any that ever existed, and as great as any that are yet to come. For the infinite 
message is there imprinted once for all in the heart of every being. Wherever 
there is a being, that being contains the infinite message of the Most High. It is 
there. The work of the Advaita, therefore, is to break down all these privileges. 
It is the hardest work of all, and curious to say, it has been less active than 
anywhere else in the land of its birth. If there is any land of privilege, it is the 
land which gave birth to this philosophy — privilege for the spiritual man as 
well as for the man of birth. There they have not so much privilege for money 
(that is one of the benefits, I think), but privilege for birth and spirituality is 
everywhere. 

Once a gigantic attempt was made to preach Vedantic ethics, which succeeded 
to a certain extent for several hundred years, and we know historically that 
those years were the best times of that nation. I mean the Buddhistic attempt to 
break down privilege. Some of the most beautiful epithets addressed to Buddha 



that I remember are, "Thou the breaker of castes, destroyer of privileges, 
preacher of equality to all beings." So, he preached this one idea of equality. Its 
power has been misunderstood to a certain extent in the brotherhood of 
Shramanas, where we find that hundreds of attempts have been made to make 
them into a church, with superiors and inferiors. Your cannot make much of a 
church when you tell people they are all gods. One of the good effects of 
Vedanta has been freedom of religious thought, which India enjoyed 
throughout all times of its history. It is something to glory in, that it is the land 
where there was never a religious persecution, where people are allowed 
perfect freedom in religion. 

This practical side of Vedanta morality is necessary as much today as it ever 
was, more necessary, perhaps, than it lever was, for all this privilege-claiming 
has become tremendously intensified with the extension of knowledge. The 
idea of God and the devil, or Ahura Mazda and Ahriman, has a good deal of 
poetry in it. The difference between God and the devil is in nothing except in 
unselfishness and selfishness. The devil knows as much as God, is as powerful 
as God; only he has no holiness — that makes him a devil. Apply the same idea 
to the modern world: excess of knowledge and power, without holiness, makes 
human beings devils. Tremendous power is Being acquired by the manufacture 
of machines and other appliances, and privilege is claimed today as it never has 
been claimed in the history of the world. That is why the Vedanta wants to 
preach against it, to break down this tyrannising over the souls of men. 

Those of you who have studied the Gita will remember the memorable 
passages: "He who looks upon the learned Brahmin upon the cow, the elephant, 
the dog, or the outcast with the same eye, he indeed is the sage, anal the wise 
man"; "Even in this life he has conquered relative existence whose mind is 
firmly fixed on this sameness, for the Lord is one and the same to all, and the 
Lord is pure; therefore those who have this sameness for all, and are pure, are 
said to be living in God." This is the gist of Vedantic morality — this sameness 
for all. We have seen that it is the subjective world that rules the objective. 
Change the subject, and the object is bound to change; purify yourself, and the 
world is bound to be purified. This one thing requires to be taught now more 
than ever before. We are becoming more and more busy about our neighbours, 
and less and less about ourselves. The world will change if we change; if we 



are pure, the world will become pure The question is why I should see evil in 
others. I cannot see evil unless I be evil. I cannot be miserable unless I am 
weak. Things that used to make me miserable when I was a child, do not do so 
now. The subject changed, so the object was bound to change; so says the 
Vedanta. All these things which we call causes of misery and evil, we shall 
laugh at when we arrive at that wonderful state of equality, that sameness. This 
is what is called in Vedanta attaining to freedom. The sign of approaching that 
freedom is more and more of this sameness and equality. In misery and 
happiness the same, in success and defeat the same — such a mind is nearing 
that state of freedom. 

The mind cannot be easily conquered. Minds that rise into waves at the 
approach of every little thing at the slightest provocation or danger, in what a 
state they must be! What to talk of greatness or spirituality, when these changes 
come over the mind? This unstable condition of the mind must be changed. We 
must ask ourselves how far we can be acted upon by the external world, and 
how far we can stand on our own feet, in spite of all the forces outside us. 

When we have succeeded in preventing all the forces in the world from 
throwing us off our balance, then alone we have attained to freedom, and not 
before. That is salvation. It is here and nowhere else; it is this moment. Out of 
this idea, out of this fountain-head, all beautiful streams of thought have flowed 
upon the world, generally misunderstood in their expression, apparently 
contradicting each other. We find hosts of brave and wonderfully spiritual 
souls, in every nation, taking to caves or forests for meditation, severing their 
connection with the external world. This is the one idea. And, on the other 
hand, we find bright, illustrious beings coming into society, tracing to raise 
their fellow men, the poor, the miserable. Apparently these two methods are 
contradictory. The man who lives in a cave, apart from his fellow-beings, 
smiles contemptuously upon those who are working for the regeneration of 
their fellow men. "How foolish!" he says; "what work is there? The world of 
Maya will always remain the world of Maya; it cannot be changed." If I ask 
one of our priers in India, "Do you believe in Vedanta?" — he says, "That is 
my religion; I certainly do; that is my life." "Very well, do you admit the 
equality of all life, the sameness of everything?" "Certainly, I do." The next 
moment, when a low-caste man approaches this priest, he jumps to one side of 
tile street to avoid that man. "Why do you jump?" "Because his very touch 



would have polluted me." "But you were just saying we are all the same, and 
you admit there is no difference in souls." He says, "Oh, that is in theory only 
for householders; when I go into a forest, then I will look upon everyone as the 
same." You ask one of your great men in England, of great birth and wealth, if 
he believes as a Christian in the brotherhood of mankind, since all came from 
God. He answers in the affirmative, but in five minutes he shouts something 
uncomplimentary about the common herd. Thus, it has been a theory only for 
several thousand years and never came into practice. All understand it, declare 
it as the truth, but when you ask then to practice it, they say, it will take 
millions of years. 

There was a certain king who had a huge number of courtiers, and each one of 
these courtiers declared he was ready to sacrifice his life for his master, and 
that he was the most sincere being ever born. In course of time, a Sannyasin 
came to the king. The king said to him that there never was a king who had so 
many sincere courtiers as he had. The Sannyasin smiled and said he did not 
believe that. The king said the Sannyasin could test it if he liked. So the 
Sannyasin declared that he would make a great sacrifice by which the king's 
reign would be extended very long, with the condition that there should be 
made a small tank into which each one of his courtiers should pour a pitcher of 
milk, in the dark of night. The king smiled and said, "Is this the test?" And he 
asked his courtiers to come to him, and told them what was to be done. They all 
expressed their joyful assent to the proposal and returned. In the dead of night, 
they came and emptied their pitchers into the tank. But in the morning, it was 
found full of water only. The courtiers were assembled and questioned about 
the matter. Each one of them had thought there would be so many pitchers of 
milk that his water would not be detected. Unfortunately most of us have the 
same idea and we do our share of work as did the courtiers in the story. 

There is so much idea of equality, says the priest, that my little privilege will 
not be detected. So say our rich men, so say the tyrants of every country. There 
is more hope for the tyrannised over, than for the tyrants. It will take a very 
long time for tyrants to arrive at freedom, but less time for the others. The 
cruelty of the fox is much more terrible than the cruelty of the lion. The lion 
strikes a blow and is quiet for some time afterwards, but the fox trying 
persistently to follow his prey never misses an opportunity. Priestcraft is in its 


nature cruel and heartless. That is why religion goes down where priestcraft 
arises. Says the Vedanta, we must give up the idea of privilege, then will 
religion come. Before that there is no religion at all. 

Do you believe what Christ says, "Sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor?" 
Practical equality there; no trying to torture the texts, but taking the truth as it 
is. Do not try to torture texts. I have heard it said that that was preached only to 
the handful of Jews who listened to Jesus. The same argument will apply to 
other things also. Do not torture texts; dare to face truth as it is. Even if we 
cannot reach to it, let us confess our weakness, but let us not destroy the ideal. 
Let us hope that we shall attain to it sometime, and strive for it. There it is — 
"Sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and follow me." Thus, trampling 
on every privilege and everything in us that works for privilege, let us work for 
that knowledge which will bring the feeling of sameness towards all mankind. 
You think that because you talk a little more polished language you are 
superior to the man in the street. Remember that when you are thinking this, 
you are not going towards freedom, but are forging a fresh chain for your feet. 
And, above all, if the pride of spirituality enters into you, woe unto you. It is 
the most awful bondage that ever existed. Neither can wealth nor any other 
bondage of the human heart bind the soul so much as this. "I am purer than 
others", is the most awful idea that can enter into the human heart. In what 
sense are you pure? The God in you is the God in all. If you have not known 
this, you have known nothing. How can there be difference? It is all one. Every 
being is the temple of the Most High; if you can see that, good, if not, 
spirituality has yet to come to you. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


PRIVILEGE 

{Delivered at the Sesame Club, London) 

Two forces seem to be working throughout nature. One of these is constantly 
differentiating, and the other is as constantly unifying; the one making more 
and more for separate individuals, the other, as it were, bringing the individuals 
into a mass, bringing out sameness in the midst of all this differentiation. It 
seems that the action of these two forces enters into every department of nature 
and of human life. On the physical plane, we always find the two forces most 
distinctly at work, separating the individuals, making them more and more 
distinct from other individuals, and again making them into species and classes, 
and bringing out similarities of expressions, and form. The same holds good as 
regards the social life of man. Since the time when society began, these two 
forces have been at work, differentiating and unifying. Their action appears in 
various forms, and is called by various names, in different places, and at 
different times. But the essence is present in all, one making for differentiation, 
and the other for sameness; the one making for caste, and the other breaking it 
down; one making for classes and privileges, and the other destroying them. 
The whole universe seems to be the battle-ground of these two forces. On the 
one hand, it is urged, that though this unifying process exists, we ought to resist 
it with all our might, because it leads towards death, that perfect unity is perfect 
annihilation, and that when the differentiating process that is at work in this 
universe ceases, the universe comes to an end. It is differentiation that causes 
the phenomena that are before us; unification would reduce them all to a 
homogeneous and lifeless matter. Such a thing, of course, mankind wants to 
avoid. The same argument is applied to all the things and facts that we see 
around us. It is urged that even in physical body and social classification, 
absolute sameness would produce natural death and social death. Absolute 
sameness of thought and feeling would produce mental decay and 
degeneration. Sameness, therefore, is to be avoided. This has been the 
argument on the one side, and it has been urged in every country and in various 
times, with only a change of language. Practically it is the same argument 
which is urged by the Brahmins of India, when they want to uphold the 






divisions and castes, when they want to uphold the privileges of a certain 
portion of the community, against everybody else. The destruction of caste, 
they declare, would lead to destruction of society, and boldly they produce the 
historical fact that theirs has been the longest-lived society. So they, with some 
show of force, appeal to this argument. With some show of authority they 
declare that that alone which makes the individual live the longest life must 
certainly be better than that which produces shorter lives. 

On the other hand, the idea of oneness has had its advocates throughout all 
times. From the days of the Upanishads, the Buddhas, and Christs, and all other 
great preachers of religion, down to our present day, in the new political 
aspirations, and in the claims of the oppressed and the downtrodden, and of all 
those who find themselves bereft of privileges — comes out the one assertion 
of this unity and sameness. But human nature asserts itself. Those who have an 
advantage want to keep it, and if they find an argument, however one-sided and 
crude, they must cling to it. This applies to both sides. 

Applied to metaphysics, this question also assumes another form. The Buddhist 
declares that we need not look for anything which brings unity in the midst of 
these phenomena, we ought to be satisfied with this phenomenal world. This 
variety is the essence of life, however miserable and weak it may seem to be; 
we can have nothing more. The Vedantist declares that unity is the only thing 
that exists; variety is but phenomenal, ephemeral and apparent. "Look not to 
variety," says the Vedantist, "go back to unity." "Avoid unity; it is a delusion," 
says the Buddhist, "go to variety." The same differences of opinion in religion 
and metaphysics have come down to our own day, for, in fact, the sum-total of 
the principles of knowledge is very small. Metaphysics and metaphysical 
knowledge, religion and religious knowledge, reached their culmination five 
thousand years ago, and we are merely reiterating the same truths in different 
languages, only enriching them sometimes by the accession of fresh 
illustrations. So this is the fight, even today. One side wants us to keep to the 
phenomenal, to all this variation, and points out, with great show of argument, 
that variation has to remain, for when that stops, everything is gone. What we 
mean by life has been caused by variation. The other side, at the same time, 
valiantly points to unity. 



Coming to ethics, we find a tremendous departure. It is, perhaps, the only 
science which makes a bold departure from this fight. For ethics is unity; its 
basis is love. It will not look at this variation. The one aim of ethics is this 
unity, this sameness. The highest ethical codes that mankind has discovered up 
to the present time know no variation; they have no time to stop to look into it; 
their one end is to make for that sameness. The Indian mind, being more 
analytical — I mean the Vedantic mind — found this unity as the result of all 
its analyses, and wanted to base everything upon this one idea of unity. But as 
we have seen, in the same country, there were other minds (the Buddhistic) 
who could not find that unity anywhere. To them all truth was a mass of 
variation, there was no connection between one thing and another. 

I remember a story told by Prof. Max Muller in one of his books, an old Greek 
story, of how a Brahmin visited Socrates in Athens. The Brahmin asked, "What 
is the highest knowledge?" And Socrates answered, "To know man is the end 
and aim of all knowledge." "But how can you know man without knowing 
God?" replied the Brahmin. The one side, the Greek side, which is represented 
by modern Europe, insisted upon the knowledge of man; the Indian side, 
mostly represented by the old religions of the world, insisted upon the 
knowledge of God. The one sees God in nature, and the other sees nature in 
God. To us, at the present time, perhaps, has been given the privilege of 
standing aside from both these aspects, and taking an impartial view of the 
whole. This is a fact that variation exists, and so it must, if life is to be. This is 
also a fact that in and through these variations unity must be perceived. This is 
a fact that God is perceived in nature. But it is also a fact that nature is 
perceived in God. The knowledge of man is the highest knowledge, and only 
by knowing man, can we know God. This is also a fact that the knowledge of 
God is the highest knowledge, and knowing God alone we can know man. 
Apparently contradictory though these statements may appear, they are the 
necessity of human nature. The whole universe is a play of unity in variety, and 
of variety in unity. The whole universe is a play of differentiation and oneness; 
the whole universe is a play of the finite in the Infinite. We cannot take one 
without granting the other. But we cannot take them both as facts of the same 
perception, as facts of the same experience; yet in this way it win always go on. 

Therefore, coming to our more particular purpose, which is religion rather than 



ethics, a state of things, where all variation has died down, giving place to. a 
uniform, dead homogeneity, is impossible so long as life lasts. Nor is it 
desirable. At the same time, there is the other side of the fact, viz that this unity 
already exists. That is the peculiar claim — not that this unity has to be made, 
but that it already exists, and that you could not perceive the variety at all, 
without it. God is not to be made, but He already exists. This has been the 
claim of all religions. Whenever one has perceived the finite, he has also 
perceived the Infinite. Some laid stress on the finite side, and declared that they 
perceived the finite without; others laid stress on the Infinite side, and declared 
they perceived the Infinite only. But we know that it is a logical necessity that 
we cannot perceive the one without the other. So the claim is that this 
sameness, this unity, this perfection — as we may call it — is not to be made, it 
already exists, and is here. We have only to recognise it, to understand it. 
Whether we know it or not, whether we can express it in clear language or not, 
whether this perception assumes the force and clearness of a sense-perception 
or not, it is there. For we are bound by the logical necessity of our minds to 
confess that it is there, else, the perception of the finite would not be. I am not 
speaking of the old theory of substance and qualities, but of oneness; that in the 
midst of all this mass of phenomena, the very fact of the consciousness that you 
and I are different brings to us, at the same moment, the consciousness that you 
and I are not different. Knowledge would be impossible without that unity. 
Without the idea of sameness there would be neither perception nor knowledge. 
So both run side by side. 

Therefore the absolute sameness of conditions, if that be the aim of ethics, 
appears to be impossible. That all men should be the same, could never be, 
however we might try. Men will be born differentiated; some will have more 
power than others; some will have natural capacities, others not; some will 
have perfect bodies, others not. We can never stop that. At the same time ring 
in our ears the wonderful words of morality proclaimed by various teachers: 
"Thus, seeing the same God equally present in all, the sage does not injure Self 
by the Self, and thus reaches the highest goal. Even in this life they have 
conquered relative existence whose minds are firmly fixed on this sameness; 
for God is pure, and God is the same to all. Therefore such are said to be living 
in God." We cannot deny that this is the real idea; yet at the same time comes 
the difficulty that the sameness as regards external forms and position can 



never be attained. 


But what can be attained is elimination of privilege. That is really the work 
before the whole world. In all social lives, there has been that one fight in every 
race and in every country. The difficulty is not that one body of men are 
naturally more intelligent than another, but whether this body of men, because 
they have the advantage of intelligence, should take away even physical 
enjoyment from those who do not possess that advantage. The fight is to 
destroy that privilege. That some will be stronger physically than others, and 
will thus naturally be able to subdue or defeat the weak, is a self-evident fact, 
but that because of this strength they should gather unto themselves all the 
attainable happiness of this life, is not according to law, and the fight has been 
against it. That some people, through natural aptitude, should be able to 
accumulate more wealth than others, is natural: but that on account of this 
power to acquire wealth they should tyrannize and ride roughshod over those 
who cannot acquire so much wealth, is not a part of the law, and the fight has 
been against that. The enjoyment of advantage over another is privilege, and 
throughout ages, the aim of morality has been its destruction. This is the work 
which tends towards sameness, towards unity, without destroying variety. 

Let all these variations remain eternally; it is the very essence of life. We shall 
all play in this way, eternally. You will be wealthy, and I shall be poor; you 
will be strong, and I shall be weak; you will be learned and I ignorant; you will 
be spiritual, and I, less so. But what of that? Let us remain so, but because you 
are physically or intellectually stronger, you must not have more privilege than 
I, and that you have more wealth is no reason why you should be considered 
greater than I, for that sameness is here, in spite of the different conditions. 

The work of ethics has been, and will be in the future, not the destruction of 
variation and the establishment of sameness in the external world — which is 
impossible for it would bring death and annihilation — but to recognise the 
unity in spite of all these variations, to recognise the God within, in spite of 
everything that frightens us, to recognise that infinite strength as the property 
of everyone in spite of all apparent weakness, and to recognise the eternal, 
infinite, essential purity of the soul in spite of everything to the contrary that 
appears on the surface. This we have to recognise. Taking one side alone, one 




half only of the position, is dangerous and liable to lead to quarrels. We must 
take the whole thing as it is, stand on it as our basis and work it out in every 
part of our lives, as individuals and as unit members of society. 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


KRISHNA 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in California, on April 1, 1900) 

Almost the same circumstances which gave birth to Buddhism in India 
surrounded the rise of Krishna. Not only this, the events of that day we find 
happening in our own times. 

There is a certain ideal. At the same time there must always be a large majority 
of the human race who cannot come up to the ideal, not even intellectually. ... 
The strong ones carry it out and many times have no sympathy for the weak. 
The weak to the strong are only beggars. The strong ones march ahead. ... Of 
course, we see at once that the highest position to take is to be sympathetic and 
helpful to those who are weak. But then, in many cases the philosopher bars the 
way to our being sympathetic. If we go by the theory that the whole of this 
infinite life has to be determined by the few years' existence here and now,... 
then it is very hopeless for us,... and we have no time to look back upon those 
who are weak. But if these are not the conditions — if the world is only one of 
the many schools through which we have to pass, if the eternal life is to be 
moulded and fashioned and guided by the eternal law, and eternal law, eternal 
chances await everyone — then we need not be in a hurry. We have time to 
sympathise, to look around, stretch out a helping hand to the weak and bring 
them up. 

With Buddhism we have two words in Sanskrit: one is translated religion, the 
other, a sect. It is the most curious fact that the disciples and descendants of 
Krishna have no name for their religion [although] foreigners call it Hinduism 
or Brahmanism. There is one religion, and there are many sects. The moment 
you give it individualist it and separate it from the rest, it is a sect, no more a 
religion. A sect [proclaims] truth and declares that there is no truth else. 
Religion believes that there has been, is, one religion in the world. There never 








were two religions. It is the same religion [presenting] different aspects in 
different places. The task is to conceive the proper understanding of the goal 
and scope of humanity. 

This was the great work of Krishna: to clear our eyes and make us look with 
broader vision upon humanity in its march upward and onward. His was the 
first heart that was large enough to see truth in all, his the first lips that uttered 
beautiful words for each and all. 

This Krishna preceded Buddha by some thousand years.... A great many 
people do not believe that he ever existed. Some believe that [the worship of 
Krishna grew out of] the old sun worship. There seem to be several Krishnas: 
one was mentioned in the Upanishads, another was king, another a general. All 
have been lumped into one Krishna. It does not matter much. The fact is, some 
individual comes who is unique in spirituality. Then all sorts of legends are 
invented around him. But, all the Bibles and stories which come to be cast upon 
this one person have to be recast in [the mould of] his character. All the stories 
of the New Testament have to be modelled upon the accepted life [and] 
character of Christ. In all of the Indian stories about Buddha the one central 
note of that whole life is kept up — sacrifice for others.... 

In Krishna we find ... two ideas [stand] supreme in his message: The first is the 
harmony of different ideas; the second is non-attachment. A man can attain to 
perfection, the highest goal, sitting on a throne, commanding armies, working 
out big plans for nations. In fact, Krishna's great sermon was preached on the 
battlefield. 

Krishna saw plainly through the vanity of all the mummeries, mockeries, and 
ceremonials of the old priests; and yet he saw some good in them. 

If you are a strong man, very good! But do not curse others who are not strong 
enough for you. ... Everyone says, "Woe unto you people! !" Who says, "Woe 
unto me that I cannot help you?" The people are doing all right to the best of 
their ability and means and knowledge. Woe unto me that I cannot lift them to 
where I am! 



So the ceremonials, worship of gods, and myths, are all right, Krishna says.... 
Why? Because they all lead to the same goal. Ceremonies, books, and forms— 
all these are links in the chain. Get hold! That is the one thing. If you are 
sincere and have really got hold of one link, do not let go; the rest is bound to 
come. [But people] do not get hold. They spend the time quarrelling and 
determining what they should get hold of, and do not get hold of anything. ... 
We are always after truth, but never want to get it. We simply want the 
pleasure to go about and ask. We have a lot of energy and spend it that way. 
That is why Krishna says: Get hold of any one of these chains that are stretched 
out from the common centre. No one step is greater than another. ... Blame no 
view of religion so far as it is sincere. Hold on to one of these links, and it will 
pull you to the centre. Your heart itself will teach all the rest. The teacher 
within will teach all the creeds, all the philosophies.... 

Krishna talks of himself as God, as Christ does. He sees the Deity in himself. 
And he says, "None can go a day out of my path. All have to come to me. 
Whosoever wants to worship in whatsoever form, I give him faith in that form, 
and through that I meet him. ..."(Gita, IV. 12.) His heart is all for the masses. 

Independent, Krishna stands out. The very boldness of it frightens us. We 
depend upon everything — ... upon a few good words, upon circumstances. 
When the soul wants to depend upon nothing, not even upon life, that is the 
height of philosophy, the height of manhood. Worship leads to the same goal. 
Krishna lays great stress upon worship. Worship God! 

Various sorts of worship we see in this world. The sick man is very worshipful 
to God. ... There is the man who loses his fortune; he also prays very much, to 
get money. The highest worship is that of the man who loves God for God's 
sake. [The question may be asked :] "Why should there be so much sorrow if 
there is a God?" The worshipper replies! " ... There is misery in the world; [but] 
because of that I do not cease to love God. I do not worship Him to take away 
my [misery]. I love Him because He is love itself." The other [types of 
worship] are lower-grade; but Krishna has no condemnation for anything. It is 
better to do something than to stand still. The man who begins to worship God 
will grow by degrees and begin to love God for love's sake. ... 



How to again purity living this life? Shall we all go to the forest caves? What 
good would it do? If the mind is not under control, it is no use living in a cave 
because the same mind will bring all disturbances there. We will find twenty 
devils in the cave because all the devils are in the mind. If the mind is under 
control, we can have the cave anywhere, wherever we are. 

It is our own mental attitude which makes the world what it is for us. Our 
thoughts make things beautiful, our thoughts make things ugly. The whole 
world is in our own minds. Learn to see things in the proper light. First, believe 
in this world — that there is meaning behind everything. Everything in the 
world is good, is holy and beautiful. If you see something evil, think that you 
are not understanding it in the right light. Throw the burden on yourselves! ... 
Whenever we are tempted to say that the world is going to the dogs, we ought 
to analyse ourselves, and we shall find that we have lost the faculty of seeing 
things as they are. 

Work day and night! "Behold, I am the Lord of the Universe. I have no duty. 
Every duty is bondage. But I work for work's sake. If I ceased to work for a 
minute, [there would be chaos]. "(Ibid. III. 22-23.) So do thou work, without any 
idea of duty. ... 

This world is a play. You are His playmates. Go on and work, without any 
sorrow, without any misery. See His play in the slums, in the saloons! Work to 
lift people! Not that they are vile or degraded; Krishna does not say that. 

Do you know why so little good work is done? My lady goes to the slum.... 

She gives a few ducats and says, "My poor men, take that and be happy!" ... Or 
my fine woman, walking through the street, sees a poor fellow and throws him 
five cents. Think of the blasphemy of it! Blessed are we that the Lord has given 
us his teaching in your own Testament. Jesus says, "Inasmuch as ye have done 
it unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me." It is blasphemy 
to think that you can help anyone. Eirst root out this idea of helping, and then 
go to worship. God's children are your Master's children. [And children are but 
different forms of the father.] You are His servant.... Serve the living God! 

God comes to you in the blind, in the halt, in the poor, in the weak, in the 
diabolical. What a glorious chance for you to worship! The moment you think 



you are "helping", you undo the whole thing and degrade yourself. Knowing 
this, work. "What follows?" you say. You do not get that heartbreak, that awful 
misery. ... Then work is no more slavery. It becomes a play, and joy itself. ... 
Work! Be unattached! That is the whole secret. If you get attached, you 
become miserable.... 

With everything we do in life we identify ourselves. Here is a man who says 
harsh words to me. I feel anger coming on me. In a few seconds anger and I are 
one, and then comes misery. Attach yourselves to the Lord and to nothing else, 
because everything else is unreal. Attachment to the unreal will bring misery. 
There is only one Existence that is real, only one Life in which there is neither 
object nor [subject]. ... 

But unattached love will not hurt you. Do anything — marry, have children.... 
Do anything you like — nothing will hurt you. Do nothing with the idea of 
"mine". Duty for duty's sake; work for work's sake. What is that to you? You 
stand aside. 

When we come to that non-attachment, then we can understand the marvellous 
mystery of the universe; how it is intense activity and vibration, and at the 
same time intensest peace and calm; how it is work every moment and rest 
every moment. That is the mystery of the universe — the impersonal and 
personal in one, the infinite and finite in one. Then we shall find the secret. "He 
who finds in the midst of intense activity the greatest rest, and in the midst of 
the greatest rest intense activity, he has become a Yogi." (Ibid. IV. 18.) He alone 
is a real worker, none else. We do a little work and break ourselves. Why? We 
become attached to that work. If we do not become attached, side by side with 
it we have infinite rest.... 

How hard it is to arrive at this sort of non-attachment! Therefore Krishna 
shows us the lower ways and methods. The easiest way for everyone is to do 
[his or her] work and not take the results. It is our desire that binds us. If we 
take the results of actions, whether good or evil, we will have to bear them. But 
if we work not for ourselves, but all for the glory of the Lord, the results will 
take care of themselves. "To work you have the right, but not to the fruits 
thereof." (Ibid. II. 47.) The soldier works for no results. He does his duty. If 




defeat comes, it belongs to the general, not to the soldier. We do our duty for 
love's sake — love for the general, love for the Lord.... 

If you are strong, take up the Vedanta philosophy and be independent. If you 
cannot do that, worship God; if not, worship some image. If you lack strength 
even to do that, do some good works without the idea of gain. Offer everything 
you have unto the service of the Lord. Fight on! "Leaves and water and one 
flowery whosoever lays anything on my altar, I receive it with equal 
delights. "(Ibid IX. 26.) If you cannot do anything, not a single good work, then 
take refuge [in the Lord]. "The Lord resides within the heart of the being, 
making them turn upon His wheel. Do thou with all thy soul and heart take 
refuge in Him. ...(Ibid XVIII. 61-62.) 

These are some of the general ideas that Krishna preached on this idea of love 
[in the Gita]. There are [in] other great books, sermons on love — as with 
Buddha, as with Jesus. ... 

A few words about the life of Krishna. There is a great deal of similarity 
between the lives of Jesus and Krishna. A discussion is going on as to which 
borrowed of the other. There was the tyrannical king in both places. Both were 
born in a manger. The parents were bound in both cases. Both were saved by 
angels. In both cases all the boys born in that year were killed. The childhood is 
the same.... Again, in the end, both were killed. Krishna was killed by 
accident; he took the man who killed him to heaven. Christ was killed, and 
blessed the robber and took him to heaven. 

There are a great many similarities in of the New Testament and the Gita. The 
human thought goes the same way. ... I will find you the answer in the words of 
Krishna himself: "Whenever virtue subsides and irreligion prevails, I come 
down. Again and again I come. Therefore, whenever thou seest a great soul 
struggling to uplift mankind, know that I am come, and worship. ..."(Ibid. IV. 8; 
X. 41.) 

At the same time, if he comes as Jesus or as Buddha, why is there so much 
schism? The preachings must be followed! A Hindu devotee would say: It is 
God himself who became Christ and Krishna and Buddha and all these [great 



teachers]. A Hindu philosopher would say: These are the great souls; they are 
already free. And though free, they refuse to accept their liberation while the 
whole world is suffering. They come again and again, take a human 
embodiment and help mankind. They know from their childhood what they are 
and what they come for. ... They do not come through bondage like we do.... 
They come out of their own free will, and cannot help having tremendous 
spiritual power. We cannot resist it. The vast mass of mankind is dragged into 
the whirlpool of spirituality, and the vibration goes on and on because one of 
these [great souls] gives a push. So it continues until all mankind is liberated 
and the play of this planet is finished. 

Glory unto the great souls whose lives we have been studying! They are the 
living gods of the world. They are the persons whom we ought to worship. If 
He comes to me, I can only recognise Him if He takes a human form. He is 
everywhere, but do we see Him? We can only see Him if He takes the 

limitation of man.If men and ... animals are manifestations of God, these 

teachers of mankind are leaders, are Gurus. Therefore, salutations unto you, 
whose footstool is worshipped by angels! Salutations unto you leaders of the 
human race! Salutations unto you great teachers! You leaders have our 
salutations for ever and ever! 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

THE GITA I 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, on May 26, 1900) 

To understand the Gita requires its historical background. The Gita is a 
commentary on the Upanishads. The Upanishads are the Bible of India. They 
occupy the same place as the New Testament does. There are [more than] a 
hundred books comprising the Upanishads, some very small and some big, 
each a separate treatise. The Upanishads do not reveal the life of any teacher, 
but simply teach principles. They are [as it were] shorthand notes taken down 
of discussion in [learned assemblies], generally in the courts of kings. The 
word Upanishad may mean "sittings" [or "sitting near a teacher"]. Those of you 
who may have studied some of the Upanishads can understand how they are 
condensed shorthand sketches. After long discussions had been held, they were 
taken down, possibly from memory. The difficulty is that you get very little of 
the background. Only the luminous points are mentioned there. The origin of 
ancient Sanskrit is 5000 B.C.; the Upanishads [are at least] two thousand years 
before that. Nobody knows [exactly] how old they are. The Gita takes the ideas 
of the Upanishads and in [some] cases the very words. They are strung together 
with the idea of bringing out, in a compact, condensed, and systematic form, 
the whole subject the Upanishads deal with. 

The [original] scriptures of the Hindus are called the Vedas. They were so vast 
— the mass of writings — that if the texts alone were brought here, this room 
would not contain them. Many of them are lost. They were divided into 
branches, each branch put into the head of certain priests and kept alive by 
memory. Such men still exist. They will repeat book after book of the Vedas 
without missing a single intonation. The larger portion of the Vedas has 
disappeared. The small portion left makes a whole library by itself. The oldest 
of these contains the hymns of the Rig-Veda. It is the aim of the modern 







scholar to restore [the sequence of the Vedic compositions]. The old, orthodox 
idea is quite different, as your orthodox idea of the Bible is quite different from 
the modern scholar's. The Vedas are divided into two portions: one the 
Upanishads, the philosophical portion, the other the work portion. 

We will try to give a little idea of the work portion. It consists of rituals and 
hymns, various hymns addressed to various gods. The ritual portion is 
composed of ceremonies, some of them very elaborate. A great many priests 
are required. The priestly function became a science by itself, owing to the 
elaboration of the ceremonials. Gradually the popular idea of veneration grew 
round these hymns and rituals. The gods disappeared and in their place were 
left the rituals. That was the curious development in India. The orthodox Hindu 
[the Mimamsaka] does not believe in gods, the unorthodox believe in them. If 
you ask the orthodox Hindu what the meaning is of these gods in the Vedas, 

[he will not be able to give any satisfactory answer]. The priests sing these 
hymns and pour libations and offering into the fire. When you ask the orthodox 
Hindu the meaning of this, he says that words have the power to produce 
certain effects. That is all. There is all the natural and supernatural power that 
ever existed. The Vedas are simply words that have the mystical power to 
produce effects if the sound intonation is right. If one sound is wrong it will not 
do. Each one must be perfect. [Thus] what in other religions is called prayer 
disappeared and the Vedas became the gods. So you see the tremendous 
importance that was attached to the words of the Vedas. These are the eternal 
words out of which the whole universe has been produced. There cannot be any 
thought without the word. Thus whatever there is in this world is the 
manifestation of thought, and thought can only manifest itself through words. 
This mass of words by which the unmanifested thought becomes manifest, that 
is what is meant by the Vedas. It follows that the external existence of 
everything [depends on the Vedas, for thought] does not exist without the 
word. If the word "horse" did not exist, none could think of a horse. [So] there 
must be [an intimate relation between] thought, word, and the external object. 
What are these words [in reality]? The Vedas. They do not call it Sanskrit 
language at all. It is Vedic language, a divine language. Sanskrit is a degenerate 
form. So are all other languages. There is no language older than Vedic. You 
may ask, "Who wrote the Vedas?" They were not written. The words are the 
Vedas. A word is Veda, if I can pronounce it rightly. Then it will immediately 


produce the [desired] effect. 


This mass of Vedas eternally exists and all the world is the manifestation of 
this mass of words. Then when the cycle ends, all this manifestation of energy 
becomes finer and finer, becomes only words, then thought. In the next cycle, 
first the thought changes into words and then out of those words [the whole 
universe] is produced. If there is something here that is not in the Vedas, that is 
your delusion. It does not exist. 

[Numerous] books upon that subject alone defend the Vedas. If you tell [their 
authors] that the Vedas must have been pronounced by men first, [they will 
simply laugh]. You never heard of any [man uttering them for the first time]. 
Take Buddha's words. There is a tradition that he lived and spoke these words 
[many times before]. If the Christian stands up and says, "My religion is a 
historical religion and therefore yours is wrong and ours is true," [the 
Mimamsaka replies], "Yours being historical, you confess that a man invented 
it nineteen hundred years ago. That which is true must be infinite and eternal. 
That is the one test of truth. It never decays, it is always the same. You confess 
your religion was created by such-and-such a man. The Vedas were not. By no 
prophets or anything. ... Only infinite words, infinite by their very nature, from 
which the whole universe comes and goes." In the abstract it is perfectly 
correct. ... The sound must be the beginning of creation. There must be germ 
sounds like germ plasm. There cannot be any ideas without the words.... 
Wherever there are sensations, ideas, emotions, there must be words. The 
difficulty is when they say that these four books are the Vedas and nothing 
else. [Then] the Buddhist will stand up and say, "Ours are Vedas. They were 
revealed to us later on." That cannot be. Nature does not go on in that way. 
Nature does not manifest her laws bit by bit, an inch of gravitation today and 
[another inch] tomorrow. No, every law is complete. There is no evolution in 
law at all. It is [given] once and for ever. It is all nonsense, this "new religion 
and better inspiration," and all that. It means nothing. There may be a hundred 
thousand laws and man may know only a few today. We discover them — that 
is all. Those old priests with their tremendous [claims about eternal words], 
having dethroned the gods, took the place of the gods. [They said], "You do not 
understand the power of words. We know how to use them. We are the living 
gods of the world. Pay us; we will manipulate the words, and you will get what 


you want. Can you pronounce the words yourself? You cannot, for, mind you, 
one mistake will produce the opposite effect. You want to be rich, handsome, 
have a long life, a fine husband?" Only pay the priest and keep quiet! 

Yet there is another side. The ideal of the first part of the Vedas is entirely 
different from the ideal of the other part, the Upanishads. The ideal of the first 
part coincides with [that of] all other religions of the world except the Vedanta. 
The ideal is enjoyment here and hereafter — man and wife, husband and 
children. Pay your dollar, and the priest will give you a certificate, and you will 
have a happy time afterwards in heaven. You will find all your people there 
and have this merry-go-round without end. No tears, no weeping — only 
laughing. No stomach-ache, but yet eating. No headache, but yet [parties]. 

That, considered the priests, was the highest goal of man. 

There is another idea in this philosophy which is according to your modern 
ideas. Man is a slave of nature, and slave eternally he has got to remain. We 
call it Karma. Karma means law, and it applies everywhere. Everything is 
bound by Karma. "Is there no way out?" "No! Remain slaves all through the 
years — fine slaves. We will manipulate the words so that you will only have 
the good and not the bad side of all — if you will pay [us] enough." That was 
the ideal of [the Mimamsakas]. These are the ideals which are popular 
throughout the ages. The vast mass of mankind are never thinkers. Even if they 
try to think, the [effect of the] vast mass of superstitions on them is terrible. 

The moment they weaken, one blow comes, and the backbone breaks into 
twenty pieces. They can only be moved by lures and threats. They can never 
move of their own accord. They must be frightened, horrified, or terrorised, and 
they are your slaves for ever. They have nothing else to do but to pay and obey. 
Everything else is done by the priest.... How much easier religion becomes! 
You see, you have nothing to do. Go home and sit quietly. Somebody is doing 
the whole thing for you. Poor, poor animals! 

Side by side, there was the other system. The Upanishads are diametrically 
opposite in all their conclusions. Eirst of all, the Upanishads believe in God, the 
creator of the universe, its ruler. You find later on [the idea of a benign 
Providence]. It is an entirely opposite [conception]. Now, although we hear the 
priest, the ideal is much more subtle. Instead of many gods they made one God. 





The second idea, that you are all bound by the law of Karma, the Upanishads 
admit, but they declare the way out. The goal of man is to go beyond law. And 
enjoyment can never be the goal, because enjoyment can only be in nature. 

In the third place, the Upanishads condemn all the sacrifices and say that is 
mummery. That may give you all you want, but it is not desirable, for the more 
you get, the more you [want], and you run round and round in a circle eternally, 
never getting to the end — enjoying and weeping. Such a thing as eternal 
happiness is impossible anywhere. It is only a child's dream. The same energy 
becomes joy and sorrow. 

I have changed my psychology a bit today. I have found the most curious fact. 
You have a certain idea and you do not want to have it, and you think of 
something else, and the idea you want to suppress is entirely suppressed. What 
is that idea? I saw it come out in fifteen minutes. It came out and staggered me. 
It was strong, and it came in such a violent and terrible fashion [that] I thought 
here was a madman. And when it was over, all that had happened [was a 
suppression of the previous emotion]. What came out? It was my own bad 
impression which had to be worked out. "Nature will have her way. What can 
suppression do?" (Gita, III. 33.) That is a terrible [statement] in the Gita. It seems 
it may be a vain struggle after all. You may have a hundred thousand [urges 
competing] at the same time. You may repress [them], but the moment the 
spring rebounds, the whole thing is there again. 

[But there is hope]. If you are powerful enough, you can divide your 
consciousness into twenty parts all at the same time. I am changing my 
psychology. Mind grows. That is what the Yogis say. There is one passion and 
it rouses another, and the first one dies. If you are angry, and then happy, the 
next moment the anger passes away. Out of that anger you manufactured the 
next state. These states are always interchangeable. Eternal happiness and 
misery are a child's dream. The Upanishads point out that the goal of man is 
neither misery nor happiness, but we have to be master of that out of which 
these are manufactured. We must be masters of the situation at its very root, as 
it were. 


The other point of divergence is: the Upanishads condemn all rituals, especially 



those that involve the killing of animals. They declare those all nonsense. One 
school of old philosophers says that you must kill such an animal at a certain 
time if the effect is to be produced. [You may reply], "But [there is] also the sin 
of taking the life of the animal; you will have to suffer for that." They say that 
is all nonsense. How do you know what is right and what is wrong? Your mind 
says so? Who cares what your mind says? What nonsense are you talking? You 
are setting your mind against the scriptures. If your mind says something and 
the Vedas say something else, stop your mind and believe in the Vedas. If they 
say, killing a man is right, that is right. If you say, "No, my conscience says 
[otherwise," it won't do]. The moment you believe in any book as the eternal 
word, as sacred, no more can you question. I do not see how you people here 
believe in the Bible whenever you say about [it], "How wonderful those words 
are, how right and how good!" Because, if you believe in the Bible as the word 
of God, you have no right to judge at all. The moment you judge, you think you 
are higher than the Bible. [Then] what is the use of the Bible to you? The 
priests say, "We refuse to make the comparison with your Bible or anybody's. 

It is no use comparing, because — what is the authority? There it ends. If you 
think something is not right, go and get it right according to the Vedas." 

The Upanishads believe in that, [but they have a higher standard too]. On the 
one hand, they do not want to overthrow the Vedas, and on the other they see 
these animal sacrifices and the priests stealing everybody's money. But in the 
psychology they are all alike. All the differences have been in the philosophy, 
[regarding] the nature of the soul. Has it a body and a mind? And is the mind 
only a bundle of nerves, the motor nerves and the sensory nerves? Psychology, 
they all take for granted, is a perfect science. There cannot be any difference 
there. All the fight has been regarding philosophy — the nature of the soul, and 
God, and all that. 

Then another great difference between the priests and the Upanishads. The 
Upanishads say, renounce. That is the test of everything. Renounce everything. 
It is the creative faculty that brings us into all this entanglement. The mind is in 
its own nature when it is calm. The moment you can calm it, that [very] 
moment you will know the truth. What is it that is whirling the mind? 
Imagination, creative activity. Stop creation and you know the truth. All power 
of creation must stop, and then you know the truth at once. 




On the other hand, the priests are all for [creation]. Imagine a species of life [in 
which there is no creative activity. It is unthinkable]. The people had to have a 
plan [of evolving a stable society. A system of rigid selection was adopted. For 
instance,] no people who are blind and halt can be married. [As a result] you 
will find so much less deformity [in India] than in any other country in the 
world. Epileptics and insane [people] are very rare [there]. That is owing to 
direct selection. The priests say, "Let them become Sannyasins." On the other 
hand, the Upanishads say, "Oh no, [the] earth's best and finest [and] freshest 
flowers should be laid upon the altar. The strong, the young, with sound 
intellect and sound body — they must struggle for the truth." 

So with all these divergences of opinion, I have told you that the priests already 
differentiated themselves into a separate caste. The second is the caste of the 
kings.... All the Upanishadic philosophy is from the brains of kings, not 
priests. There [runs] an economic struggle through every religious struggle. 
This animal called man has some religious influence, but he is guided by 
economy. Individuals are guided by something else, but the mass of mankind 
never made a move unless economy was [involved]. You may [preach a 
religion that may not be perfect in every detail], but if there is an economic 
background [to it], and you have the most [ardent champions] to preach it, you 
can convince a whole country.... 

Whenever any religion succeeds, it must have economic value. Thousands of 
similar sects will be struggling for power, but only those who meet the real 
economic problem will have it. Man is guided by the stomach. He walks and 
the stomach goes first and the head afterwards. Have you not seen that? It will 
take ages for the head to go first. By the time a man is sixty years of age, he is 
called out of [the world]. The whole of life is one delusion, and just when you 
begin to see things the way they are, you are snatched off. So long as the 
stomach went first you were all right. When children's dreams begin to vanish 
and you begin to look at things the way they are, the head goes. Just when the 
head goes first, [you go out]. 

[For] the religion of the Upanishads to be popularised was a hard task. Very 
little economy is there, but tremendous altruism.... 



The Upanishads had very little kingdom, although they were discovered by 
kings that held all the royal power in their hands. So the struggle ... began to be 
fiercer. Its culminating point came two thousand years after, in Buddhism. The 
seed of Buddhism is here, [in] the ordinary struggle between the king and the 
priest; and [in the struggle] all religion declined. One wanted to sacrifice 
religion, the other wanted to cling to the sacrifices, to Vedic gods, etc. 
Buddhism ... broke the chains of the masses. All castes and creeds alike 
became equal in a minute. So the great religious ideas in India exist, but have 
yet to be preached: otherwise they do no good. ... 

In every country it is the priest who is conservative, for two reasons — because 
it is his bread and because he can only move with the people. All priests are not 
strong. If the people say, "Preach two thousand gods," the priests will do it. 
They are the servants of the congregation who pay them. God does not pay 
them. So blame yourselves before blaming the priests. You can only get the 
government and the religion and the priesthood you deserve, and no better. 

So the great struggle began in India and it comes to one of its culminating 
points in the Gita. When it was causing fear that all India was going to be 
broken up between [the] two ... [groups], there rose this man Krishna, and in 
the Gita he tries to reconcile the ceremony and the philosophy of the priests and 
the people. Krishna is loved and worshipped in the same way as you do Christ. 
The difference is only in the age. The Hindus keep the birthday of Krishna as 
you do Christ's. Krishna lived five thousand years ago and his life is full of 
miracles, some of them very similar to those in the life of Christ. The child was 
born in prison. The father took him away and put him with the shepherds. All 
children born in that year were ordered to be killed. He was killed; that was his 
fate. 

Krishna was a married man. There are thousands of books about him. They do 
not interest me much. The Hindus are great in telling stories, you see. [If] the 
Christian missionaries tell one story from their Bible, the Hindus will produce 
twenty stories. You say the whale swallowed Jonah; the Hindus say someone 
swallowed an elephant. ... Since I was a child I have heard about Krishna's life. 

I take it for granted there must have been a man called Krishna, and his Gita 
shows he has [left] a wonderful book. I told you, you can understand the 



character of a man by analysing the fables about him. The fables have the 
nature [of decorations]. You must find they are all polished and manipulated to 
fit into the character. For instance, take Buddha. The central idea [is] sacrifice. 
There are thousands of folklore, but in every case the sacrifice must have been 
kept up. There are thousands of stories about Lincoln, about some 
characteristic of that great man. You take all the fables and find the general 
idea and [know] that that was the central character of the man. You find in 
Krishna that non-attachment is the central idea. He does not need anything. He 
does not want anything. He works for work's sake. "Work for work's sake. 
Worship for worship's sake. Do good because it is good to do good. Ask no 
more." That must have been the character of the man. Otherwise these fables 
could not be brought down to the one idea of non-attachment. The Gita is not 
his only sermon. ... 

He is the most rounded man I know of, wonderfully developed equally in brain 
and heart and hand. Every moment [of his] is alive with activity, either as a 
gentleman, warrior, minister, or something else. Great as a gentleman, as a 
scholar, as a poet. This all-rounded and wonderful activity and combination of 
brain and heart you see in the Gita and other books. Most wonderful heart, 
exquisite language, and nothing can approach it anywhere. This tremendous 
activity of the man — the impression is still there. Five thousand years have 
passed and he has influenced millions and millions. Just think what an 
influence this man has over the whole world, whether you know it or not. My 
regard for him is for his perfect sanity. No cobwebs in that brain, no 
superstition. He knows the use of everything, and when it is necessary to 
[assign a place to each], he is there. Those that talk, go everywhere, question 
about the mystery of the Vedas, etc., they do not know the truth. They are no 
better than frauds. There is a place in the Vedas [even] for superstition, for 
ignorance. The whole secret is to find out the proper place for everything. 

Then that heart! He is the first man, way before Buddha, to open the door of 
religion to every caste. That wonderful mind! That tremendously active life! 
Buddha's activity was on one plane, the plane of teaching. He could not keep 
his wife and child and become a teacher at the same time. Krishna preached in 
the midst of the battlefield. "He who in the midst of intense activity finds 
himself in the greatest calmness, and in the greatest peace finds intense activity. 



that is the greatest [Yogi as well as the wisest man]." (Ibid. IV. 18.) It means 
nothing to this man — the flying of missiles about him. Calm and sedate he 
goes on discussing the problems of life and death. Each one of the prophets is 
the best commentary on his own teaching. If you want to know what is meant 
by the doctrine of the New Testament, you go to Mr. So-and-so. [But] read 
again and again [the four Gospels and try to understand their import in the light 
of the wonderful life of the Master as depicted there]. The great men think, and 
you and I [also] think. But there is a difference. We think and our bodies do not 
follow. Our actions do not harmonise with our thoughts. Our words have not 
the power of the words that become Vedas. ... Whatever they think must be 
accomplished. If they say, "I do this," the body does it. Perfect obedience. This 
is the end. You can think yourself God in one minute, but you cannot be [God]. 
That is the difficulty. They become what they think. We will become [only] by 
[degrees]. 

You see, that was about Krishna and his time. In the next lecture we will know 
more of his book. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE GITA II 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, on May 28, 1900) 

The Gita requires a little preliminary introduction. The scene is laid on the 
battlefield of Kurukshetra. There were two branches of the same race fighting 
for the empire of India about five thousand years ago. The Pandavas had the 
right, but the Kauravas had the might. The Pandavas were five brothers, and 
they were living in a forest. Krishna was the friend of the Pandavas. The 
Kauravas would not grant them as much land as would cover the point of a 
needle. 

The opening scene is the battlefield, and both sides see their relatives and 
friends — one brother on one side and another on the other side; a grandfather 
on one side, grandson on the other side.... When Arjuna sees his own friends 
and relatives on the other side and knows that he may have to kill them, his 
heart gives way and he says that he will not fight. Thus begins the Gita. 

For all of us in this world life is a continuous fight.... Many a time comes when 
we want to interpret our weakness and cowardice as forgiveness and 
renunciation. There is no merit in the renunciation of a beggar. If a person who 
can [give a blow] forbears, there is merit in that. If a person who has, gives up, 
there is merit in that. We know how often in our lives through laziness and 
cowardice we give up the battle and try to hypnotise our minds into the belief 
that we are brave. 

The Gita opens with this very significant verse: "Arise, O Prince! Give up this 
faint-heartedness, this weakness! Stand up and fight!" (Gita, II. 3.) Then Arjuna, 
trying to argue the matter [with Krishna], brings higher moral ideas, how non- 
resistance is better than resistance, and so on. He is trying to justify himself, 
but he cannot fool Krishna. Krishna is the higher Self, or God. He sees through 







the argument at once. In this case [the motive] is weakness. Arjuna sees his 
own relatives and he cannot strike them.... 

There is a conflict in Arjuna's heart between his emotionalism and his duty. 

The nearer we are to [beasts and] birds, the more we are in the hells of emotion. 
We call it love. It is self-hypnotisation. We are under the control of our 
[emotions] like animals. A cow can sacrifice its life for its young. Every animal 
can. What of that? It is not the blind, birdlike emotion that leads to perfection. 

... [To reach] the eternal consciousness, that is the goal of man! There emotion 
has no place, nor sentimentalism, nor anything that belongs to the senses — 
only the light of pure reason. [There] man stands as spirit. 

Now, Arjuna is under the control of this emotionalism. He is not what he 
should be — a great self-controlled, enlightened sage working through the 
eternal light of reason. He has become like an animal, like a baby, just letting 
his heart carry away his brain, making a fool of himself and trying to cover his 
weakness with the flowery names of "love" and so on. Krishna sees through 
that. Arjuna talks like a man of little learning and brings out many reasons, but 
at the same time he talks the language of a fool. 

"The sage is not sorry for those that are living nor for those that die." (Ibid. 11.) 
[Krishna says :] "You cannot die nor can I. There was never a time when we 
did not exist. There will never be a time when we shall not exist. As in this life 
a man begins with childhood, and [passes through youth and old age, so at 
death he merely passes into another kind of body]. Why should a wise man be 
sorry?" (Ibid. 12-13.) And where is the beginning of this emotionalism that has 
got hold of you? It is in the senses. "It is the touch of the senses that brings all 
this quality of existence: heat and cold, pleasure and pain. They come and go." 
(Ibid. 14.) Man is miserable this moment, happy the next. As such he cannot 
experience the nature of the soul.... 

"Existence can never be non-existence, neither can non-existence ever become 
existence. ... Know, therefore, that that which pervades all this universe is 
without beginning or end. It is unchangeable. There is nothing in the universe 
that can change [the Changeless]. Though this body has its beginning and end, 
the dweller in the body is infinite and without end." (Ibid. 16-18.) 



Knowing this, stand up and fight! Not one step back, that is the idea.... Fight it 
out, whatever comes. Let the stars move from the sphere! Let the whole world 
stand against us! Death means only a change of garment. What of it? Thus 
fight! You gain nothing by becoming cowards.... Taking a step backward, you 
do not avoid any misfortune. You have cried to all the gods in the world. Has 
misery ceased? The masses in India cry to sixty million gods, and still die like 
dogs. Where are these gods? ... The gods come to help you when you have 
succeeded. So what is the use? Die game. ... This bending the knee to 
superstitions, this selling yourself to your own mind does not befit you, my 
soul. You are infinite, deathless, birthless. Because you are infinite spirit, it 
does not befit you to be a slave. ... Arise! Awake! Stand up and fight! Die if 
you must. There is none to help you. You are all the world. Who can help you? 

"Beings are unknown to our human senses before birth and after death. It is 
only in the interim that they are manifest. What is there to grieve about? (Ibid. 
28.) 

"Some look at It [the Self] with wonder. Some talk of It as wonderful. Others 
hear of It as wonderful. Others, hearing of It, do not understand." (Ibid. 29.) 

But if you say that killing all these people is sinful, then consider this from the 
standpoint of your own caste-duty. ... "Making pleasure and misery the same, 
making success and defeat the same, do thou stand up and fight. (Ibid. 38.) 

This is the beginning of another peculiar doctrine of the Gita — the doctrine of 
non-attachment. That is to say, we have to bear the result of our own actions 
because we attach ourselves to them. ... "Only what is done as duty for duty's 
sake ... can scatter the bondage of Karma." (Ibid. 39.) There is no danger that 
you can overdo it.... "If you do even a little of it, [this Yoga will save you from 
the terrible round of birth and death]. (Ibid. 40.) 

"Know, Arjuna, the mind that succeeds is the mind that is concentrated. The 
minds that are taken up with two thousand subjects (have) their energies 
dispersed. Some can talk flowery language and think there is nothing beyond 
the Vedas. They want to go to heaven. They want good things through the 
power of the Vedas, and so they make sacrifices." (Ibid. 41-43.) Such will never 



attain any success [in spiritual life] unless they give up all these materialistic 
ideas. (Ibid. 44.) 

That is another great lesson. Spirituality can never be attained unless all 
material ideas are given up. ... What is in the senses? The senses are all 
delusion. People wish to retain them [in heaven] even after they are dead — a 
pair of eyes, a nose. Some imagine they will have more organs than they have 
now. They want to see God sitting on a throne through all eternity — the 
material body of God.... Such men's desires are for the body, for food and 
drink and enjoyment. It is the materialistic life prolonged. Man cannot think of 
anything beyond this life. This life is all for the body. "Such a man never 
comes to that concentration which leads to freedom." (Ibid. 44.) 

"The Vedas only teach things belonging to the three Gunas, to Sattva, Rajas, 
and Tamas." (Ibid. 45.) The Vedas only teach about things in nature. People 
cannot think anything they do not see on earth. If they talk about heaven, they 
think of a king sitting on a throne, of people burning incense. It is all nature, 
nothing beyond nature. The Vedas, therefore, teach nothing but nature. "Go 
beyond nature, beyond the dualities of existence, beyond your own 
consciousness, caring for nothing, neither for good nor for evil." (Ibid. 45.) 

We have identified ourselves with our bodies. We are only body, or rather, 
possessed of a body. If I am pinched, I cry. All this is nonsense, since I am the 
soul. All this chain of misery, imagination, animals, gods, and demons, 
everything, the whole world all this comes from the identification of ourselves 
with the body. I am spirit. Why do I jump if you pinch me? ... Look at the 
slavery of it. Are you not ashamed? We are religious! We are philosophers! We 
are sages! Lord bless us! What are we? Living hells, that is what we are. 
Lunatics, that is what we are! 

We cannot give up the idea [of body]. We are earth-bound.... Our ideas are 
burial grounds. When we leave the body we are bound by thousands of 
elements to those [ideas]. 

Who can work without any attachment? That is the real question. Such a man is 
the same whether his work succeeds or fails. His heart does not give one false 




beat even if his whole life-work is burnt to ashes in a moment. "This is the sage 
who always works for work's sake without caring for the results. Thus he goes 
beyond the pain of birth and death. Thus he becomes free." (Ibid. 51.) Then he 
sees that this attachment is all delusion. The Self can never be attached.... Then 
he goes beyond all the scriptures and philosophies. (Ibid. 52.) If the mind is 
deluded and pulled into a whirlpool by books and scriptures, what is the good 
of all these scriptures? One says this, another says that. What book shall you 
take? Stand alone! See the glory of your own soul, and see that you will have to 
work. Then you will become a man of firm will. (Ibid. 53.) 

Arjuna asks: "Who is a person of established will?" (Ibid. 54.) 

[Krishna answers:] "The man who has given up all desires, who desires 
nothing, not even this life, nor freedom, nor gods, nor work, nor anything. 
When he has become perfectly satisfied, he has no more cravings." (Ibid. 55.) He 
has seen the glory of the Self and has found that the world, and the gods, and 
heaven are ... within his own Self. Then the gods become no gods; death 
becomes no death; life becomes no life. Everything has changed. "A man is 
said to be [illumined] if his will has become firm, if his mind is not disturbed 
by misery, if he does not desire any happiness, if he is free of all [attachment], 
of all fear, of all anger. (Ibid. 56.)... 

"As the tortoise can draw in his legs, and if you strike him, not one foot comes 
out, even so the sage can draw all his sense-organs inside," (Ibid. 58.) and 
nothing can force them out. Nothing can shake him, no temptation or anything. 
Let the universe tumble about him, it does not make one single ripple in his 
mind. 

Then comes a very important question. Sometimes people fast for days. ... 
When the worst man has fasted for twenty days, he becomes quite gentle. 
Fasting and torturing themselves have been practiced by people all over the 
world. Krishna's idea is that this is all nonsense. He says that the senses will for 
the moment recede from the man who tortures himself, but will emerge again 
with twenty times more [power].... What should you do? The idea is to be 
natural — no asceticism. Go on, work, only mind that you are not attached. The 
will can never be fixed strongly in the man who has not learnt and practiced the 



secret of non-attachment. 


I go out and open my eyes. If something is there, I must see it. I cannot help it. 
The mind runs after the senses. Now the senses must give up any reaction to 
nature. 

"Where it is dark night for the [sense-bound] world, the self controlled [man] is 
awake. It is daylight for him. ... And where the world is awake, the sage 
sleeps." (Ibid. 69.) Where is the world awake? In the senses. People want to eat 
and drink and have children, and then they die a dog's death. ... They are 
always awake for the senses. Even their religion is just for that. They invent a 
God to help them, to give them more women, more money, more children — 
never a God to help them become more godlike! "Where the whole world is 
awake, the sage sleeps. But where the ignorant are asleep, there the sage keeps 
awake" (ibid. 69.) — in the world of light where man looks upon himself not as 
a bird, not as an animal, not as a body, but as infinite spirit, deathless, 
immortal. There, where the ignorant are asleep, and do not have time, nor 
intellect, nor power to understand, there the sage is awake. That is daylight for 
him. 

"As all the rivers of the world constantly pour their waters into the ocean, but 
the ocean's grand, majestic nature remains undisturbed and unchanged, so even 
though all the senses bring in sensations from nature, the ocean-like heart of the 
sage knows no disturbance, knows no fear." (Ibid. 70.) Let miseries come in 
millions of rivers and happiness in hundreds! I am no slave to misery! I am no 
slave to happiness! 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE GITA III 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, on May 29, 1900) 

Arjuna asks: "You just advised action, and yet you uphold knowledge of 
Brahman as the highest form of life. Krishna, if you think that knowledge is 
better than action, why do you tell me to act?" (Gita III. I.) 

[Shri Krishna]: "From ancient times these two systems have come down to us. 
The Sankhya philosophers advance the theory of knowledge. The Yogis 
advance the theory of work. But none can attain to peace by renouncing 
actions. None in this life can stop activity even for a moment. Nature's qualities 
[Gunas] will make him act. He who stops his activities and at the same time is 
still thinking about them attains to nothing; he only becomes a hypocrite. But 
he who by the power of his mind gradually brings his sense-organs under 
control, employing them in work, that man is better. Therefore do thou work." 
(Ibid. 2-8.) ... 

"Even if you have known the secret that you have no duty, that you are free, 
still you have to work for the good of others. Because whatever a great man 
does, ordinary people will do also. (Ibid. 20-21.) If a great man who has attained 
peace of mind and freedom ceases to work, then all the rest without that 
knowledge and peace will try to imitate him, and thus confusion would arise. 
(Ibid. 22-24.) 

"Behold, Arjuna, there is nothing that I do not possess and nothing that I want 
to acquire. And yet I continue to work. If I stopped work for a moment, the 
whole universe would [be destroyed]. (Ibid. 22-24.) That which the ignorant do 
with desire for results and gain, let the wise do without any attachment and 
without any desire for results and gain." (Ibid. 25.) 






Even if you have knowledge, do not disturb the childlike faith of the ignorant. 
On the other hand, go down to their level and gradually bring them up. (Ibid. 26, 
29.) That is a very powerful idea, and it has become the ideal in India. That is 
why you can see a great philosopher going into a temple and worshipping 
images. It is not hypocrisy. 

Later on we read what Krishna says, "Even those who worship other deities are 
really worshipping me." (Ibid. IX. 23.) It is God incarnate whom man is 
worshipping. Would God be angry if you called Him by the wrong name? He 
would be no God at all! Can't you understand that whatever a man has in his 
own heart is God — even if he worships a stone? What of that! 

We will understand more clearly if we once get rid of the idea that religion 
consists in doctrines. One idea of religion has been that the whole world was 
born because Adam ate the apple, and there is no way of escape. Believe in 
Jesus Christ — in a certain man's death! But in India there is quite a different 
idea. [There] religion means realisation, nothing else. It does not matter 
whether one approaches the destination in a carriage with four horses, in an 
electric car, or rolling on the ground. The goal is the same. Eor the [Christians] 
the problem is how to escape the wrath of the terrible God. Eor the Indians it is 
how to become what they really are, to regain their lost Selfhood.... 

Have you realised that you are spirit? When you say, "I do," what is meant by 
that — this lump of flesh called the body or the spirit, the infinite, ever blessed, 
effulgent, immortal? You may be the greatest philosopher, but as long as you 
have the idea that you are the body, you are no better than the little worm 
crawling under your foot! No excuse for you! So much the worse for you that 
you know all the philosophies and at the same time think you are the body! 
Body-gods, that is what you are! Is that religion? 

Religion is the realisation of spirit as spirit. What are we doing now? Just the 
opposite, realising spirit as matter. Out of the innnortal God we manufacture 
death and matter, and out of dead dull matter we manufacture spirit.... 

If you [can realise Brahman] by standing on your head, or on one foot, or by 
worshipping five thousand gods with three heads each — welcome to it! ... Do 






it any way you can! Nobody has any right to say anything. Therefore, Krishna 
says, if your method is better and higher, you have no business to say that 
another man's method is bad, however wicked you may think it. 

Again, we must consider, religion is a [matter of] growth, not a mass of foolish 
words. Two thousand years ago a man saw God. Moses saw God in a burning 
bush. Does what Moses did when he saw God save you? No man's seeing God 
can help you the least bit except that it may excite you and urge you to do the 
same thing. That is the whole value of the ancients' examples. Nothing more. 
[Just] signposts on the way. No man's eating can satisfy another man. No man's 
seeing God can save another man. You have to see God yourself. All these 
people fighting about what God's nature is — whether He has three heads in 
one body or five heads in six bodies. Have you seen God? No.... And they do 
not believe they can ever see Him. What fools we mortals be! Sure, lunatics! 

[In India] it has come down as a tradition that if there is a God, He must be 
your God and my God. To whom does the sun belong! You say Uncle Sam is 
everybody's uncle. If there is a God, you ought to be able to see Him. If not, let 
Him go. 

Each one thinks his method is best. Very good! But remember, it may be good 
for you. One food which is very indigestible to one is very digestible to 
another. Because it is good for you, do not jump to the conclusion that your 
method is everybody's method, that Jack's coat fits John and Mary. All the 
uneducated, uncultured, unthinking men and women have been put into that 
sort of strait jacket! Think for yourselves. Become atheists! Become 
materialists! That would be better. Exercises the mind! ... What right have you 
to say that this man's method is wrong? It may be wrong for you. That is to say, 
if you undertake the method, you will be degraded; but that does not mean that 
he will be degraded. Therefore, says Krishna, if you have knowledge and see a 
man weak, do not condemn him. Go to his level and help him if you can. He 
must grow. I can put five bucketfuls of knowledge into his head in five hours. 
But what good will it do? He will be a little worse than before. 

Whence comes all this bondage of action? Because we chain the soul with 
action. According to our Indian system, there are two existences: nature on the 



one side and the Self, the Atman, on the other. By the word nature is meant not 
only all this external world, but also our bodies, the mind, the will, even down 
to what says "I". Beyond all that is the infinite life and light of the soul — the 
Self, the Atman. ... According to this philosophy the Self is entirely separate 
from nature, always was and always will be. ... There never was a time, when 
the spirit could be identified even with the mind.... 

It is self-evident that the food you eat is manufacturing the mind all the time. It 
is matter. The Self is above any connection with food. Whether you eat or not 
does not matter. Whether you think or not... does not matter. It is infinite light. 
Its light is the same always. If you put a blue or a green glass [before a light], 
what has that to do with the light? Its colour is unchangeable. It is the mind 
which changes and gives the different colours. The moment the spirit leaves the 
body, the whole thing goes to pieces. 

The reality in nature is spirit. Reality itself — the light of the spirit — moves 
and speaks and does everything [through our bodies, minds, etc.]. It is the 
energy and soul and life of the spirit that is being worked upon in different 
ways by matter.... The spirit is the cause of all our thoughts and body-action 
and everything, but it is untouched by good or evil, pleasure or pain, heat or 
cold, and all the dualism of nature, although it lends its light to everything. 

"Therefore, Arjuna, all these actions are in nature. Nature ... is working out her 
own laws in our bodies and minds. We identify ourselves with nature and say, 

'I am doing this.' This way delusion seizes us." (Ibid. III. 27.) 

We always act under some compulsion. When hunger compels me, I eat. And 
suffering is still worse — slavery. That real "I" is eternally free. What can 
compel it to do anything? The sufferer is in nature. It is only when we identify 
ourselves with the body that we say, "I am suffering; I am Mr. So and-so" — 
all such nonsense. But he who has known the truth, holds himself aloof. 
Whatever his body does, whatever his mind does, he does not care. But mind 
you, the vast majority of mankind are under this delusion; and whenever they 
do any good, they feel that they are [the doers]. They are not yet able to 
understand higher philosophy. Do not disturb their faith! They are shunning 
evil and doing good. Great idea! Let them have it! ... They are workers for 





good. By degrees they will think that there is greater glory than that of doing 
good. They will only witness, and things are done.... Gradually they will 
understand. When they have shunned all evil and done all good, then they will 
begin to realise that they are beyond all nature. They are not the doers. They 
stand [apart]. They are the ... witness. They simply stand and look. Nature is 
begetting all the universe.... They turn their backs. "In the beginning, O 
beloved, there only existed that Existence. Nothing else existed. And That 
[brooding], everything else was created." (Chhandogya, VI. ii. 2-3.) 

"Even those who know the path act impelled by their own nature. Everyone 
acts according to his nature. He cannot transcend it." The atom cannot disobey 
the law. Whether it is the mental or the physical atom, it must obey the law. 
"What is the use of [external restraint]?" (Gita, III. 33.) 

What makes the value of anything in life? Not enjoyment, not possessions. 
Analyse everything. You will find there is no value except in experience, to 
teach us something. And in many cases it is our hardships that give us better 
experience than enjoyment. Many times blows give us better experience than 
the caresses of nature.... Even famine has its place and value.... 

According to Krishna, we are not new beings just come into existence. Our 
minds are not new minds.... In modern times we all know that every child 
brings [with him] all the past, not only of humanity, but of the plant life. There 
are all the past chapters, and this present chapter, and there are a whole lot of 
future chapters before him. Everyone has his path mapped and sketched and 
planned out for him. And in spite of all this darkness, there cannot be anything 
uncaused — no event, no circumstance.... It is simply our ignorance. The whole 
infinite chain of causation ... is bound one link to another back to nature. The 
whole universe is bound by that sort of chain. It is the universal [chain of] 
cause and effect, you receiving one link, one part, I another.... And that [part] is 
our own nature. 

Now Shri Krishna says: "Better die in your own path than attempt the path of 
another. "(Ibid. 35.) This is my path, and I am down here. And you are way up 
there, and I am always tempted to give up my path thinking I will go there and 
be with you. And if I go up, I am neither there nor here. We must not lose sight 



of this doctrine. It is all [a matter of] growth. Wait and grow, and you attain 
everything; otherwise there will be [great spiritual danger]. Here is the 
fundamental secret of teaching religion. 

What do you mean by "saving people" and all believing in the same doctrine? 

It cannot be. There are the general ideas that can be taught to mankind. The 
true teacher will be able to find out for you what your own nature is. Maybe 
you do not know it. It is possible that what you think is your own nature is all 
wrong. It has not developed to consciousness. The teacher is the person who 
ought to know.... He ought to know by a glance at your face and put you on 
[your path]. We grope about and struggle here and there and do all sorts of 
things and make no progress until the time comes when we fall into that life- 
current and are carried on. The sign is that the moment we are in that stream we 
will float. Then there is no more struggle. This is to be found out. Then die in 
that [path] rather than giving it up and taking hold of another. 

Instead, we start a religion and make a set of dogmas and betray the goal of 
mankind and treat everyone [as having] the same nature. No two persons have 
the same mind or the same body.... No two persons have the same religion.... 

If you want to be religious, enter not the gate of any organised religions. They 
do a hundred times more evil than good, because they stop the growth of each 
one's individual development. Study everything, but keep your own seat firm. 

If you take my advice, do not put your neck into the trap. The moment they try 
to put their noose on you, get your neck out and go somewhere else. [As] the 
bee culling honey from many flowers remains free, not bound by any flower, 
be not bound.... Enter not the door of any organised religion. [Religion] is only 
between you and your God, and no third person must come between you. Think 
what these organised religions have done! What Napoleon was more terrible 
than those religious persecutions? ... If you and I organise, we begin to hate 
every person. It is better not to love, if loving only means hating others. That is 
no love. That is hell! If loving your own people means hating everybody else, it 
is the quintessence of selfishness and brutality, and the effect is that it will 
make you brutes. Therefore, better die working out your own natural religion 
than following another's natural religion, however great it may appear to you. 
(Ibid. 35.) 


"Beware, Arjuna, lust and anger are the great enemies. These are to be 
controlled. These cover the knowledge even of those [who are wise]. This fire 
of lust is unquenchable. Its location is in the sense-organs and in the mind. The 
Self desires nothing. (Ibid. 37,40.) 

"This Yoga I taught in ancient times [to Vivaswan; Vivaswan taught it to 
Manu]. ... Thus it was that the knowledge descended from one thing to another. 
But in time this great Yoga was destroyed. That is why I am telling it to you 
again today." (Ibid. IV. 1-3.) 

Then Arjuna asks, "Why do you speak thus? You are a man born only the other 
day, and [Vivaswan was born long before you]. What do you mean that you 
taught him?" (Ibid. 4.) 

Then Krishna says, "O Arjuna, you and I have run the cycle of births and 
deaths many times, but you are not conscious of them all. I am without 
beginning, birthless, the absolute Lord of all creation. I through my own nature 
take form. Whenever virtue subsides and wickedness prevails, I come to help 
mankind. For the salvation of the good, for the destruction of wickedness, for 
the establishment of spirituality I come from time to time. Whosoever wants to 
reach me through whatsoever ways, I reach him through that. But know, 
Arjuna, none can ever swerve from my path." (Ibid. 5-8,11.) None ever did. How 
can we? None swerves from His path. 

... All societies are based upon bad generalization. The law can only be formed 
upon perfect generalization. What is the old saying: Every law has its 
exception? ... If it is a law, it cannot be broken. None can break it. Does the 
apple break the law of gravitation? The moment a law is broken, no more 
universe exists. There will come a time when you will break the law, and that 
moment your consciousness, mind, and body will melt away. 

There is a man stealing there. Why does he steal? You punish him. Why can 
you not make room for him and put his energy to work? ... You say, "You are a 
sinner," and many will say he has broken the law. All this herd of mankind is 
forced [into uniformity] and hence all trouble, sin, and weakness.... The world 
is not as bad as you think. It is we fools who have made it evil. We 


manufacture our own ghosts and demons, and then ... we cannot get rid of 
them. We put our hands before our eyes and cry: "Somebody give us light." 
Fools! Take your hands from your eyes! That is all there is to it.... We call upon 
the gods to save us and nobody blames himself. That is the pity of it. Why is 
there so much evil in society? What is it they say? Flesh and the devil and the 
woman. Why make these things [up]? Nobody asks you to make them [up]. 
"None, O Arjuna, can swerve from my path." (Ibid. 11.) We are fools, and our 
paths are foolish. We have to go through all this Maya. God made the heaven, 
and man made the hell for himself. 

"No action can touch me. I have no desire for the results of action. Whosoever 
knows me thus knows the secret and is not bound by action. The ancient sages, 
knowing this secret [could safely engage in action]. Do thou work in the same 
fashion. (Ibid. 14-15.) 

"He who sees in the midst of intense activity, intense calm, and in the midst of 
intensest peace is intensely active [is wise indeed]. (Ibid 18.) ... This is the 
question: With every sense and every organ active, have you that tremendous 
peace [so that] nothing can disturb you? Standing on Market Street, waiting for 
the car with all the rush ... going on around you, are you in meditation — calm 
and peaceful? In the cave, are you intensely active there with all quiet about 
you? If you are, you are a Yogi, otherwise not. 

"[The seers call him wise] whose every attempt is free, without any desire for 
gain, without any selfishness." (Ibid. 19). Truth can never come to us as long as 
we are selfish. We colour everything with our own selves. Things come to us as 
they are. Not that they are hidden, not at all! We hide them. We have the brush. 
A thing comes, and we do not like it, and we brush a little and then look at it. ... 
We do not want to know. We paint everything with ourselves. In all action the 
motive power is selfishness. Everything is hidden by ourselves. We are like the 
caterpillar which takes the thread out of his own body and of that makes the 
cocoon, and behold, he is caught. By his own work he imprisons himself. That 
is what we are doing. The moment I say "me" the thread makes a turn. "I and 
mine," another turn. So it goes. ... 

We cannot remain without action for a moment. Act! But just as when your 



neighbour asks you, "Come and help me!" have you exactly the same idea 
when you are helping yourself. No more. Your body is of no more value than 
that of John. Don't do anything more for your body than you do for John. That 
is religion. 

"He whose efforts are bereft of all desire and selfishness has burnt all this 
bondage of action with the fire of knowledge. He is wise." (Ibid. 19.) Reading 
books cannot do that. The ass can be burdened with the whole library; that does 
not make him learned at all. What is the use of reading many books? "Giving 
up all attachment to work, always satisfied, not hoping for gain, the wise man 
acts and is beyond action." (Ibid. 20.)... 

Naked I came out of my mother's womb and naked I return. Helpless I came 
and helpless I go. Helpless I am now. And we do not know [the goal]. It is 
terrible for us to think about it. We get such odd ideas! We go to a medium and 
see if the ghost can help us. Think of the weakness! Ghosts, devils, gods, 
anybody — come on! And all the priests, all the charlatans! That is just the 
time they get hold of us, the moment we are weak. Then they bring in all the 
gods. 

I see in my country a man becomes strong, educated, becomes a philosopher, 
and says, "All this praying and bathing is nonsense." ... The man's father dies, 
and his mother dies. That is the most terrible shock a Hindu can have. You will 
find him bathing in every dirty pool, going into the temple, licking the dust. ... 
Help anyone! But we are helpless. There is no help from anyone. That is the 
truth. There have been more gods than human beings; and yet no help. We die 
like dogs — no help. Everywhere beastliness, famine, disease, misery, evil! 
And all are crying for help. But no help. And yet, hoping against hope, we are 
still screaming for help. Oh, the miserable condition! Oh, the terror of it! Look 
into your own heart! One half of [the trouble] is not our fault, but the fault of 
our parents. Bom with this weakness, more and more of it was put into our 
heads. Step by step we go beyond it. 

It is a tremendous error to feel helpless. Do not seek help from anyone. We are 
our own help. If we cannot help ourselves, there is none to help us. ... "Thou 
thyself art thy only friend, thou thyself thy only enemy. There is no other 




enemy but this self of mine, no other friend but myself." (Ibid. VI. 5.) This is the 
last and greatest lesson, and Oh, what a time it takes to learn it! We seem to get 
hold of it, and the next moment the old wave comes. The backbone breaks. We 
weaken and again grasp for that superstition and help. Just think of that huge 
mass of misery, and all caused by this false idea of going to seek for help! 

Possibly the priest says his routine words and expects something. Sixty 
thousand people look to the skies and pray and pay the priest. Month after 
month they still look, still pay and pray. ... Think of that! Is it not lunacy? What 
else is it? Who is responsible? You may preach religion, but to excite the minds 
of undeveloped children... ! You will have to suffer for that. In your heart of 
hearts, what are you? For every weakening thought you have put into 
anybody's head you will have to pay with compound interest. The law of 
Karma must have its pound of flesh.... 

There is only one sin. That is weakness. When I was a boy I read Milton's 
Paradise Lost. The only good man I had any respect for was Satan. The only 
saint is that soul that never weakens, faces everything, and determines to die 
game. 

Stand up and die game! ... Do not add one lunacy to another. Do not add your 
weakness to the evil that is going to come. That is all I have to say to the world. 
Be strong! ... You talk of ghosts and devils. We are the living devils. The sign 
of life is strength and growth. The sign of death is weakness. Whatever is 
weak, avoid! It is death. If it is strength, go down into hell and get hold of it! 
There is salvation only for the brave. "None but the brave deserves the fair." 
None but the bravest deserves salvation. Whose hell? Whose torture? Whose 
sin? Whose weakness? Whose death? Whose disease? 

You believe in God. If you do, believe in the real God. "Thou art the man, thou 
the woman, thou the young man walking in the strength of youth,... thou the 
old man tottering with his stick." (Shvetashvatara, IV. 3.) Thou art weakness. Thou 
art fear. Thou art heaven, and Thou art hell. Thou art the serpent that would 
sting. Come thou as fear! Come thou as death! Come thou as misery! ... 

All weakness, all bondage is imagination. Speak one word to it, it must vanish. 


Do not weaken! There is no other way out.... Stand up and be strong! No fear. 
No superstition. Face the truth as it is! If death comes — that is the worst of our 
miseries — let it come! We are determined to die game. That is all the religion 
I know. I have not attained to it, but I am struggling to do it. I may not, but you 
may. Go on! 

Where one sees another, one hears another so long as there are two, there must 
be fear, and fear is the mother of all [misery]. Where none sees another, where 
it is all One, there is none to be miserable, none to be unhappy. (Chhandogya, VII. 
xxiii-xxiv, (adapted)) [There is only] the One without a second. Therefore be not 
afraid. Awake, arise, and stop not till the goal is reached! 


» 



Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

MOHAMMED 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered on March 25, 1900, in the San Francisco Bay Area) 

The ancient message of Krishna is one harmonising three — Buddha's, Christ's 
and Mohammed's. Each of the three started an idea and carried it to its extreme. 
Krishna antedates all the other prophets. [Yet, we might say,] Krishna takes the 
old ideas and synthesises them, [although] his is the most ancient message. His 
message was for the time being submerged by the advance wave of Buddhism. 
Today it is the message peculiar to India. If you will have it so, this afternoon I 
will take Mohammed and bring out the particular work of the great Arabian 
prophet.... 

Mohammed [as] a young man ... did not [seem to] care much for religion. He 
was inclined to make money. He was considered a nice young man and very 
handsome. There was a rich widow. She fell in love with this young man, and 
they married. When Mohammed had become emperor over the larger part of 
the world, the Roman and Persian empires were all under his feet, and he had a 
number of wives. When one day he was asked which wife he liked best, he 
pointed to his first wife: "Because she believed [in] me first." Women have 
faith.... Gain independence, gain everything, but do not lose that characteristic 
of women! ... 

Mohammed's heart was sick at the sin, idolatry and mock worship, 
superstitions and human sacrifices, and so on. The Jews were degraded by the 
Christians. On the other hand, the Christians were worse degraded than his own 
countrymen. 

We are always in a hurry. [But] if any great work is to be done, there must be 
great preparation. ... After much praying, day and night, Mohammed began to 
have dreams and visions. Gabriel appeared to him in a dream and told him that 







he was the messenger of truth. He told him that the message of Jesus, of Moses, 
and all the prophets would be lost and asked him to go and preach. Seeing the 
Christians preaching politics in the name of Jesus, seeing the Persians 
preaching dualism, Mohammed said: "Our God is one God. He is the Lord of 
all that exists. There is no comparison between Him and any other." 

God is God. There is no philosophy, no complicated code of ethics. "Our God 
is one without a second, and Mohammed is the Prophet." ... Mohammed began 
to preach it in the streets of Mecca. ... They began to persecute him, and he fled 
into the city of [Medina]. He began to fight, and the whole race became united. 
[Mohammedanism] deluged the world in the name of the Lord. The 
tremendous conquering power! ... 

You ... people have very hard ideas and are so superstitious and prejudiced! 
These messengers must have come from God, else how could they have been 
so great? You look at every defect. Each one of us has his defects. Who hasn't? 
I can point out many defects in the Jews. The wicked are always looking for 
defects. ... Flies come and seek for the [ulcer], and bees come only for the 
honey in the flower. Do not follow the way of the fly but that of the bee.... 

Mohammed married quite a number of wives afterwards. Great men may marry 
two hundred wives each. "Giants" like you, I would not allow to marry one 
wife. The characters of the great souls are mysterious, their methods past our 
finding out. We must not judge them. Christ may judge Mohammed. Who are 
you and I? Little babies. What do we understand of these great souls? ... 

[Mohammedanism] came as a message for the masses. ... The first message 
was equality. ... There is one religion — love. No more question of race, 
colour, [or] anything else. Join it! That practical quality carried the day.... The 
great message was perfectly simple. Believe in one God, the creator of heaven 
and earth. All was created out of nothing by Him. Ask no questions. ... 

Their temples are like Protestant churches. ... no music, no paintings, no 
pictures. A pulpit in the corner; on that lies the Koran. The people all stand in 
line. No priest, no person, no bishop.... The man who prays must stand at the 
side of the audience. Some parts are beautiful.... 



These old people were all messengers of God. I fall down and worship them; I 
take the dust of their feet. But they are dead! ... And we are alive. We must go 
ahead! ... Religion is not an imitation of Jesus or Mohammed. Even if an 
imitation is good, it is never genuine. Be not an imitation of Jesus, but be Jesus, 
You are quite as great as Jesus, Buddha, or anybody else. If we are not... we 
must struggle and be. I would not be exactly like Jesus. It is unnecessary that I 
should be born a Jew. ... 

The greatest religion is to be true to your own nature. Have faith in yourselves! 
If you do not exist, how can God exist, or anybody else? Wherever you are, it 
is this mind that perceives even the Infinite. I see God, therefore He exists. If I 
cannot think of God, He does not exist [for me]. This is the grand march of our 
human progress. 

These [great souls] are signposts on the way. That is all they are. They say, 
"Onward, brothers!" We cling to them; we never want to move. We do not 
want to think; we want others to think for us. The messengers fulfil their 
mission. They ask to be up and doing. A hundred years later we cling to the 
message and go to sleep. 

Talking about faith and belief and doctrine is easy, but it is so difficult to build 
character and to stem the tide of the senses. We succumb. We become 
hypocrites. ... 

[Religion] is not a doctrine, [not] a rule. It is a process. That is all. [Doctrines 
and rules] are all for exercise. By that exercise we get strong and at last break 
the bonds and become free. Doctrine is of no use except for gymnastics. ... 
Through exercise the soul becomes perfect. That exercise is stopped when you 
say, "I believe." ... 

"Whenever virtue subsides and immorality abounds, I take human form. In 
every age I come for the salvation of the good, for the destruction of the 
wicked, for the establishment of spirituality." (Gita, IV. 7-8.) 

[Such] are the great messengers of light. They are our great teachers, our elder 
brothers. But we must go our own way! 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


VILVAMANGALA 

(Found in the papers of Miss S. E. Waldo by Swami Raghavananda when he was in the U.S.A.) 

This is a story from one of the books of India, called "Lives of Saints". There 
was a young man, a Brahmin by birth, in a certain village. The man fell in love 
with a bad woman in another village. There was a big river between the two 
villages, and this man, every day, used to go to that girl, crossing this river in a 
ferry boat. Now, one day he had to perform the obsequies of his father, and so, 
although he was longing, almost dying to go to the girl, he could not. The 
ceremonies had to be performed, and all those things had to be undergone; it is 
absolutely necessary in Hindu society. He was fretting and fuming and all that, 
but could not help it. At last the ceremony ended, and night came, and with the 
night, a tremendous howling storm arose. The rain was pouring down, and the 
river was lashed into gigantic waves. It was very dangerous to cross. Yet he 
went to the bank of the river. There was no ferry boat. The ferrymen were 
afraid to cross, but he would go; his heart was becoming mad with love for the 
girl, so he would go. There was a log floating down, and he got that, and with 
the help of it, crossed the river, and getting to the other side dragged the log up, 
threw it on the bank, and went to the house. The doors were closed. He 
knocked at the door, but the wind was howling, and nobody heard him. So he 
went round the walls and at last found what he thought to be a rope, hanging 
from the wall. He clutched at it, saying to himself, "Oh, my love has left a rope 
for me to climb." By the help of that rope he climbed over the wall, got to the 
other side, missed his footing, and fell, and noise aroused the inmates of the 
house, and the came out and found the man there in a faint. She revived him, 
and noticing that he was smelling very unpleasantly, she said, "What is the 
matter with you? Why this stench on your body? How did you come into the 
house?" He said, "Why, did not my love put that rope there?" She smiled, and 
said, "What love? We are for money, and do you think that I let down a rope 
for you, fool that you are? How did you cross the river?" "Why, I got hold of a 
log of wood." "Let us go and see," said the girl. The rope was a cobra, a 
tremendously poisonous serpent, whose least touch is death. It had its head in a 
hole, and was getting in when the man caught hold of its tail, and he thought it 
was a rope. The madness of love made him do it. When the serpent has its head 






in its hole, and its body out, and you catch hold of it, it will not let its head 
come out; so the man climbed up by it, but the force of the pull killed the 
serpent. "Where did you get the log?" "It was floating down the river." It was a 
festering dead body; the stream had washed it down and that he took for a log, 
which explained why he had such an unpleasant odour. The woman looked at 
him and said, "I never believed in love; we never do; but, if this is not love, the 
Lord have mercy on me. We do not know what love is. But, my friend, why do 
you give that heart to a woman like me? Why do you not give it to God? You 
will be perfect." It was a thunderbolt to the man's brain. He got a glimpse of the 
beyond for a moment. "Is there a God?" "Yes, yes, my friend, there is," said the 
woman. And the man walked on, went into a forest, began to weep and pray. "I 
want Thee, Oh Lord! This tide of my love cannot find a receptacle in little 
human beings. I want to love where this mighty river of my love can go, the 
ocean of love; this rushing tremendous river of my love cannot enter into little 
pools, it wants the infinite ocean. Thou art there; come Thou to me." So he 
remained there for years. After years he thought he had succeeded, he became a 
Sannyasin and he came into the cities. One day he was sitting on the bank of a 
river, at one of the bathing places, and a beautiful young girl, the wife of a 
merchant of the city, with her servant, came and passed the place. The old man 
was again up in him, the beautiful face again attracted him. The Yogi looked 
and looked, stood up and followed the girl to her home. Presently the husband 
came by, and seeing the Sannyasin in the yellow garb he said to him, "Come in, 
sir, what can I do for you?" The Yogi said, "I will ask you a terrible thing." 

"Ask anything, sir, I am a Grihastha (householder), and anything that one asks I 
am ready to give." "I want to see your wife." The man said, "Lord, what is this! 
Well, I am pure, and my wife is pure, and the Lord is a protection to all. 
Welcome; come in sir." He came in, and the husband introduced him to his 
wife. "What can I do for you?" asked the lady. He looked and looked, and then 
said, "Mother, will you give me two pins from your hair?" "Here they are." He 
thrust them into his two eyes saying "Get away, you rascals! Henceforth no 
fleshy things for you. If you are to see, see the Shepherd of the groves of 
Vrindaban with the eyes of the soul. Those are all the eyes you have." So he 
went back into the forest. There again he wept and wept and wept. It was all 
that great flow of love in the man that was struggling to get at the truth, and at 
last he succeeded; he gave his soul, the river of his love, the right direction, and 
it came to the Shepherd. The story goes that he saw God in the form of 


Krishna. Then, for once, he was sorry that he had lost his eyes, and that he 
could only have the internal vision. He wrote some beautiful poems of love. In 
all Sanskrit books, the writers first of all salute their Gurus. So he saluted that 
girl as his first Guru. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


THE SOUL AND GOD 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, March 23, 1900) 

Whether it was fear or mere inquisitiveness which first led man to think of 
powers superior to himself, we need not discuss. ... These raised in the mind 
peculiar worship tendencies, and so on. There never have been [times in the 
history of mankind] without [some ideal] of worship. Why? What makes us all 
thing beyond what we see — whether it be a beautiful morning or a fear of 
dead spirits? ... We need not go back into prehistoric times, for it is a fact 
present today as it was two thousand years ago. We do not find satisfaction 
here. Whatever our station in life— [even if we are] powerful and wealthy we 
cannot find satisfaction. 

Desire is infinite. Its fulfilment is very limited.. There is no end to our desires; 
but when we go to fulfil them, the difficulty comes. It has been so with the 
most primitive minds, when their desires were [few]. Even [these] could not be 
accomplished. Now, with our arts and sciences improved and multiplied, our 
desires cannot be fulfilled [either]. On the other hand, we are struggling to 
perfect means for the fulfilment of desires, and the desires are increasing.... 

The most primitive man naturally wanted help from outside for things which he 
could not accomplish. He desired something, and it could not be obtained. He 
wanted help from other powers. The most ignorant primitive man and the most 
cultivated man today, appealing to God and asking for the fulfilment of some 
desire, are exactly the same. What difference? [Some people] find a great deal 
of difference. We are always finding much difference in things when there is 
no difference at all. Both [the primitive man and the cultivated man] plead to 
the same [power]. You may call it God or Allah or Jehovah. Human beings 
want something and cannot get it by their own powers, and are after someone 
who will help them. This is primitive, and it is still present with us. ... We are 









all born savages and gradually civilise ourselves.... All of us here, if we search, 
will find the same fact. Even now this fear does not leave us. We may talk big, 
become philosophers and all that; but when the blow comes, we find that we 
must beg for help. We believe in all the superstitions that ever existed. [But] 
there is no superstition in the world [that does not have some basis of truth]. If I 
cover my face and only the tip of my [nose] is showing, still it is a bit of my 
face. So [with] the superstitions — the little bits are true. 

You see, the lowest sort of manifestation of religion came with the burial of the 
departed. ... First they wrapped them up and put them in mounds, and the 
spirits of the departed came and lived in the [mounds, at night]. ... Then they 
began to bury them. ... At the gate stands a terrible goddess with a thousand 
teeth.... Then [came] the burning of the body and the flames bore the spirit up. 
... The Egyptians brought food and water for the departed. 

The next great idea was that of the tribal gods. This tribe had one god and that 
tribe another. The Jews had their God Jehovah, who was their own tribal god 
and fought against all the other gods and tribes. That god would do anything to 
please his own people. If he killed a whole tribe not protected by him, that was 
all right, quite good. A little love was given, but that love was confined to a 
small section. 

Gradually, higher ideals came. The chief of the conquering tribe was the Chief 
of chiefs, God of gods. ... So with the Persians when they conquered Egypt. 

The Persian emperor was the Lord of [lords], and before the emperor nobody 
could stand. Death was the penalty for anyone who looked at the Persian 
emperor. 

Then came the ideal of God Almighty and All-powerful, the omnipotent, 
omniscient Ruler of the universe: He lives in heaven, and man pays special 
tribute to his Most Beloved, who creates everything for man. The whole world 
is for man. The sun and moon and stars are [for him]. All who have those ideas 
are primitive men, not civilised and not cultivated at all. All the superior 
religions had their growth between the Ganga and the Euphrates.... Outside of 
India we will find no further development [of religion beyond this idea of God 
in heaven]. That was the highest knowledge ever obtained outside of India. 


There is the local heaven where he is and [where] the faithful shall go when 
they die.... As far as I have seen, we should call it a very primitive idea.... 
Mumbo jumbo in, Africa [and] God in heaven — the same. He moves the 
world, and of course his will is being done everywhere.... 

The old Hebrew people did not care for any heaven. That is one of the reasons 
they [opposed] Jesus of Nazareth — because he taught life after death. Paradise 
in Sanskrit means land beyond this life. So the paradise was to make up for all 
this evil. The primitive man does not care [about] evil.... He never questions 
why there should be any. ... 

... The word devil is a Persian word. ... The Persians and Hindus [share the 
Aryan ancestry] upon religious grounds, and ... they spoke the same language, 
only the words one sect uses for good the other uses for bad. The word Deva is 
an old Sanskrit word for God, the same word in the Aryan languages. Here the 
word means the devil.... 

Later on, when man developed [his inner life], he began to question, and to say 
that God is good. The Persians said that there were two gods — one was bad 
and one was good. [Their idea was that] everything in this life was good: 
beautiful country, where there was spring almost the whole year round and 
nobody died; there was no disease, everything was fine. Then came this 
Wicked One, and he touched the land, and then came death and disease and 
mosquitoes and tigers and lions. Then the Aryans left their fatherland and 
migrated southward. The old Aryans must have lived way to the north. The 
Jews learnt it [the idea of the devil] from the Persians. The Persians also taught 
that there will come a day when this wicked god will be killed, and it is our 
duty to stay with the good god and add our force to him in this eternal struggle 
between him and the wicked one. ... The whole world will be burnt out and 
everyone will get a new body. 

The Persian idea was that even the wicked will be purified and not be bad any 
more. The nature of the Aryan was love and poetry. They cannot think of their 
being burnt [for eternity]. They will all receive new bodies. Then no more 
death. So that is the best about [religious] ideas outside of India. ... 





Along with that is the ethical strain. All that man has to do is to take care of 
three things: good thought, good word, good deed. That is all. It is a practical, 
wise religion. Already there has come a little poetry in it. But there is higher 
poetry and higher thought. 

In India we see this Satan in the most ancient part of the Vedas. He just 
(appears) and immediately disappears. ... In the Vedas the bad god got a blow 
and disappeared. He is gone, and the Persians took him. We are trying to make 
him leave the world [al] together. Taking the Persian idea, we are going to make 
a decent gentleman of him; give him a new body. There was the end of the 
Satan idea in India. 

But the idea of God went on; but mind you, here comes another fact. The idea 
of God grew side by side with the idea of [materialism] until you have traced it 
up to the emperor of Persia. But on the other hand comes in metaphysics, 
philosophy. There is another line of thought, the idea of [the non-dual Atman, 
man's] own soul. That also grows. So, outside of India ideas about God had to 
remain in that concrete form until India came to help them out a bit.... The 
other nations stopped with that old concrete idea. In this country [America], 
there are millions who believe that God is [has?] a body. ... Whole sects say it. 
[They believe that] He rules the world, but there is a place where He has a 
body. He sits upon a throne. They light candles and sing songs Just as they do 
in our temples. 

But in India they are sensible enough never to make [their God a physical 
being]. You never see in India a temple of Brahma. Why? Because the idea of 
the soul always existed. The Hebrew race never questioned about the soul. 
There is no soul idea in the Old Testament at all. The first is in the New 
Testament. The Persians, they became so practical — wonderfully practical 
people — a fighting, conquering race. They were the English people of the old 
time, always fighting and destroying their neighbours — too much engaged in 
that sort of thing to think about the soul.... 

The oldest idea of [the] soul [was that of] a fine body inside this gross one. The 
gross one disappears and the fine one appears. In Egypt that fine one also dies, 
and as soon as the gross body disintegrates, the fine one also disintegrates. That 




is why they built those pyramids [and embalmed the dead bodies of their 
ancestors, thus hoping to secure immortality for the departed].... 

The Indian people have no regard for the dead body at all. [Their attitude is :] 
"Let us take it and burn it." The son has to set fire to his father's body.... 

There are two sorts of races, the divine and the demonic. The divine think that 
they are soul and spirit. The demonic think that they are bodies. The old Indian 
philosophers tried to insist that the body is nothing. "As a man emits his old 
garment and takes a new one, even so the old body is [shed] and he takes a new 
one" (Gita, II. 22). In my case, all my surrounding and education were trying to 
[make me] the other way. I was always associated with Mohammedans and 
Christians, who take more care of the body.... 

It is only one step from [the body] to the spirit.... [In India] they became 
insistent on this ideal of the soul. It became [synonymous with] the idea of 
God. ... If the idea of the soul begins to expand, [man must arrive at the 
conclusion that it is beyond name and form].... The Indian idea is that the soul 
is formless. Whatever is form must break some time or other. There cannot be 
any form unless it is the result of force and matter; and all combinations must 
dissolve. If such is the case, [if] your soul is [made of name and form, it 
disintegrates], and you die, and you are no more immortal. If it is double, it has 
form and it belongs to nature and it obeys nature's laws of birth and death. ... 
They find that this [soul] is not the mind ... neither a double.... 

Thoughts can be guided and controlled.... [The Yogis of India] practiced to see 
how far the thoughts can be guided and controlled. By dint of hard work, 
thoughts may be silenced altogether. If thoughts were [the real man], as soon as 
thought ceases, he ought to die. Thought ceases in meditation; even the mind's 
elements are quite quiet. Blood circulation stops. His breath stops, but he is not 
dead. If thought were he, the whole thing ought to go, but they find it does not 
go. That is practical [proof]. They came to the conclusion that even mind and 
thought were not the real man. Then speculation showed that it could not be. 

I come, I think and talk. In the midst of all [this activity is] this unity [of the 
Self]. My thought and action are varied, many [fold] ... but in and through them 


runs ... that one unchangeable One. It cannot be the body. That is changing 
every minute. It cannot be the mind; new and fresh thoughts [come] all the 
time. It is neither the body nor the mind. Both body and mind belong to nature 
and must obey nature's laws. A free mind never will. ... 

Now, therefore, this real man does not belong to nature. It is the person whose 
mind and body belong to nature. So much of nature we are using. Just as you 
come to use the pen and ink and chair, so he uses so much of nature in fine and 
in gross form; gross form, the body, and fine form, the mind. If it is simple, it 
must be formless. In nature alone are forms. That which is not of nature cannot 
have any forms, fine or gross. It must be formless. It must be omnipresent. 
Understand this. [Take] this glass on the table. The glass is form and the table 
is form. So much of the glass-ness goes off, so much of table-ness [when they 
break].... 

The soul... is nameless because it is formless. It will neither go to heaven nor 
[to hell] any more than it will enter this glass. It takes the form of the vessel it 
fills. If it is not in space, either of two things is possible. Either the [soul 
permeates] space or space is in [it]. You are in space and must have a form. 
Space limits us, binds us, and makes a form of us. If you are not in space, space 
is in you. All the heavens and the world are in the person. ... 

So it must be with God. God is omnipresent. "Without hands [he grasps] 
everything; without feet he can move. ... " (Shvetashvatara Upanishad, III. 19.) He 
[is] the formless, the deathless, the eternal. The idea of God came. ... He is the 
Lord of souls, just as my soul is the [lord] of my body. If my soul left the body, 
the body would not be for a moment. If He left my soul, the soul would not 
exist. He is the creator of the universe; of everything that dies He is the 
destroyer. His shadow is death; His shadow is life. 

[The ancient Indian philosophers] thought: ... This filthy world is not fit for 
man's attention. There is nothing in the universe that is [permanent — neither 
good nor evil]. ... 

I told you ... Satan ... did not have much chance [in India]. Why? Because they 
were very bold in religion. They were not babies. Have you seen that 



characteristic of children? They are always trying to throw the blame on 
someone else. Baby minds [are] trying, when they make a mistake, to throw the 
blame upon someone [else]. On the one hand, we say, "Give me this; give me 
that." On the other hand, we say, "I did not do this; the devil tempted me. The 
devil did it." That is the history of mankind, weak mankind. ... 

Why is evil? Why is [the world] the filthy, dirty hole? We have made it. 
Nobody is to blame. We put our hand in the fire. The Lord bless us, [man gets] 
just what he deserves. Only He is merciful. If we pray to Him, He helps us. He 
gives Himself to us. 

That is their idea. They are [of a] poetic nature. They go crazy over poetry. 
Their philosophy is poetry. This philosophy is a poem. ... All [high thought] in 
the Sanskrit is written in poetry. Metaphysics, astronomy — all in poetry. 

We are responsible, and how do we come to mischief? [You may say], "I was 
born poor and miserable. I remember the hard struggle all my life." 
Philosophers say that you are to blame. You do not mean to say that all this 
sprang up without any cause whatever? You are a rational being. Your life is 
not without cause, and you are the cause. You manufacture your 
own life all the time. ... You make and mould your own life. You are 
responsible for yourself. Do not lay the blame upon anybody, any Satan. You 
will only get punished a little more. ... 

[A man] is brought up before God, and He says, "Thirty-one stripes for you," ... 
when comes another man. He says, "Thirty stripes: fifteen for that fellow, and 
fifteen for the teacher — that awful man who taught him." That is the awful 
thing in teaching. I do not know what I am going to get. I go all over the world. 
If I have to get fifteen for each one I have taught!... 

We have to come to this idea: "This My Maya is divine." It is My activity [My] 
divinity. "[My Maya] is hard to cross, but those that take refuge in me [go 
beyond may a]." (Gita, VII. 14.) But you find out that it is very difficult to cross 
this ocean [of Maya by] yourself. You cannot. It is the old question - hen and 
egg. If you do any work, that work becomes the cause and produces the effect. 
That effect [again] becomes the cause and produces the effect. And so on. If 


you push this down, it never stops. Once you set a thing in motion, there is no 
more stopping. I do some work, good or bad, [and it sets up a chain reaction].... 
I cannot stop now. 

It is impossible for us to get out from this bondage [by ourselves]. It is only 
possible if there is someone more powerful than this law of causation, and if he 
takes mercy on us and drags us out. 

And we declare that there is such a one - God. There is such a being, all 
merciful.... If there is a God, then it is possible for me to be saved. How can 
you be saved by your own will? Do you see the philosophy of the doctrine of 
salvation by grace? You Western people are wonderfully clever, but when you 
undertake to explain philosophy, you are so wonderfully complicated. How can 
you save yourself by work, if by salvation you mean that you will be taken out 
of all this nature? Salvation means just standing upon God, but if you 
understand what is meant by salvation, then you are the Self.... You are not 
nature. You are the only thing outside of souls and gods and nature. These are 
the external existences, and God [is] interpenetrating both nature and soul. 

Therefore, just as my soul is [to] my body, we? as it were, are the bodies of 
God. God-souls-nature — it is one. The One, because, as I say, I mean the 
body, soul, and mind. But, we have seen, the law of causation pervades every 
bit of nature, and once you have got caught you cannot get out. When once you 
get into the meshes of law, a possible way of escape is not [through work done] 
by you. You can build hospitals for every fly and flea that ever lived.... All this 
you may do, but it would never lead to salvation.... [Hospitals] go up and they 
come down again. [Salvation] is only possible if there is some being whom 
nature never caught, who is the Ruler of nature. He rules nature instead of 
being ruled by nature. He wills law instead of being downed by law. ... He 
exists and he is all merciful. The moment you seek Him [He will save you]. 

Why has He not taken us out? You do not want Him. You want everything but 
Him. The moment you want Him, that moment you get Him. We never want 
Him. We say, "Lord, give me a fine house." We want the house, not Him. 

"Give me health! Save me from this difficulty!" When a man wants nothing but 
Him, [he gets Him]. "The same love which wealthy men have for gold and 



silver and possessions, Lord, may I have the same love for Thee. I want neither 
earth nor heaven, nor beauty nor learning. I do not want salvation. Let me go to 
hell again and again. But one thing I want: to love Thee, and for love's sake — 
not even for heaven." 

Whatever man desires, he gets. If you always dream of having a body, [you 
will get another body]. When this body goes away he wants another, and goes 
on begetting body after body. Love matter and you become matter. You first 
become animals. When I see a dog gnawing a bone, I say, "Lord help us!" Love 
body until you become dogs and cats! Still degenerate, until you become 
minerals — all body and nothing else.... 

There are other people, who would have no compromise. The road to salvation 
is through truth. That was another watchword. ... 

[Man began to progress spiritually] when he kicked the devil out. He stood up 
and took the responsibility of the misery of the world upon his own shoulders. 
But whenever he looked [at the] past and future and [at the] law of causation, 
he knelt down and said, "Lord, save me, [thou] who [art] our creator, our 
father, and dearest friend." That is poetry, but not very good poetry, I think. 
Why not? It is the painting of the Infinite [no doubt]. You have it in every 
language how they paint the Infinite. [But] it is the infinite of the senses, of the 
muscles.... 

"[Him] the sun [does not illumine], nor the moon, nor the stars, [nor] the flash 
of lightning." (Katha Upanishad, 11. ii. 15.) That is another painting of the Infinite, 
by negative language.... And the last Infinite is painted in [the] spirituality of 
the Upanishads. Not only is Vedanta the highest philosophy in the world, but it 
is the greatest poem.... 

Mark today, this is the ... difference between the first part of the Vedas and the 
second. In the first, it is all in [the domain of] sense. But all religions are only 
[concerned with the] infinite of the external world — nature and nature's 
God.... [Not so Vedanta]. This is the first light that the human mind throws 
back [of] all that. No satisfaction [comes] of the infinite [in] space. "[The] Self- 
exisent [One] has [created] the [senses as turned] ... to the outer world. Those 





therefore who [seek] outside will never find that [which is within]. There are 
the few who, wanting to know the truth, turn their eyes inward and in their own 
souls behold the glory [of the Self]." (Katha Upanishad, II. i. I.) 

It is not the infinite of space, but the real Infinite, beyond space, beyond time.... 
Such is the world missed by the Occident.... Their minds have been turned to 
external nature and nature's God. Look within yourself and find the truth that 
you had [forgotten]. Is it possible for mind to come out of this dream without 
the help of the gods? Once you start the action, there is no help unless the 
merciful Father takes us out. 

That would not be freedom, [even] at the hands of the merciful God. Slavery is 
slavery. The chain of gold is quite as bad as the chain of iron. Is there a way 
out? 

You are not bound. No one was ever bound. [The Self] is beyond. It is the all. 
You are the One; there are no two. God was your own reflection cast upon the 
screen of Maya. The real God [is the Self]. He [whom man] ignorantly 
worships is that reflection. [They say that] the Father in heaven is God. Why 
God? [It is because He is] your own reflection that [He] is God. Do you see 
how you are seeing God all the time? As you unfold yourself, the reflection 
grows [clearer]. 

"Two beautiful birds are there sitting upon the same tree. The one [is] calm, 
silent, majestic; the one below [the individual self], is eating the fruits, sweet 
and bitter, and becoming happy and sad. [But when the individual self beholds 
the worshipful Lord as his own true Self, he grieves no more.]" (Mundaka 
Upanishad, III. i. 1-2.) 

... Do not say "God". Do not say "Thou". Say "I". The language of [dualism] 
says, "God, Thou, my Father." The language of [non-dualism] says, "Dearer 
unto me than I am myself. I would have no name for Thee. The nearest I can 
use is L... 

"God is true. The universe is a dream. Blessed am I that I know this moment 
that I [have been and] shall be free all eternity; ... that I know that I am 
worshipping only myself; that no nature, no delusion, had any hold on me. 


Vanish nature from me, vanish [these] gods; vanish worship; ... vanish 
superstitions, for I know myself. I am the Infinite. All these — Mrs. So-and-so, 
Mr. So-and-so, responsibility, happiness, misery — have vanished. I am the 
Infinite. How can there be death for me, or birth? Whom shall I fear? I am the 
One. Shall I be afraid of myself? Who is to be afraid of [whom]? I am the one 
Existence. Nothing else exists. I am everything." 

It is only the question of memory [of your true nature], not salvation by work. 
Do you get salvation? You are [already] free. 

Go on saying, "I am free". Never mind if the next moment delusion comes and 
says, "I am bound." Dehypnotise the whole thing. 

[This truth] is first to be heard. Hear it first. Think on it day and night. Fill the 
mind [with it] day and night: "I am It. I am the Lord of the universe. Never was 
there any delusion.... " Meditate upon it with all the strength of the mind till 
you actually see these walls, houses, everything, melt away — [until] body, 
everything, vanishes. "I will stand alone. I am the One." Struggle on! "Who 
cares! We want to be free; [we] do not want any powers. Worlds we renounce; 
heavens we renounce; hells we renounce. What do I care about all these 
powers, and this and that! What do I care if the mind is controlled or 
uncontrolled! Let it run on. What of that! I am not the mind. Let it go on!" 

The sun [shines on the just and on the unjust]. Is he touched by the defective 
[character] of anyone? "I am He. Whatever [my] mind does, I am not touched. 
The sun is not touched by shining on filthy places, I am Existence." 

This is the religion of [non-dual] philosophy. [It is] difficult. Struggle on! 
Down with all superstitions! Neither teachers nor scriptures nor gods [exist]. 
Down with temples, with priests, with gods, with incarnations, with God 
himself! I am all the God that ever existed! There, stand up philosophers! No 
fear! Speak no more of God and [the] superstition of the world. Truth alone 
triumphs, and this is true. I am the Infinite. 

All religious superstitions are vain imaginations.... This society, that I see you 
before me, and [that] I am talking to you — this is all superstition; all must be 





given up. Just see what it takes to become a philosopher! This is the [path] of 
[Jnana-] Yoga, the way through knowledge. The other [paths] are easy, slow,... 
but this is pure strength of mind. No weakling [can follow this path of 
knowledge. You must be able to say:] "I am the Soul, the ever free; [I] never 
was bound. Time is in me, not I in time. God was born in my mind. God the 
Father, Father of the universe — he is created by me in my own mind...." 

Do you call yourselves philosophers? Show it! Think of this, talk [of] this, and 
[help] each other in this path, and give up all superstition! 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 


BREATHING 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, March 28, 1900) 

Breathing exercises have been very popular in India from the most ancient 
times, so much so [that] they form a part of their religion, just as going to 
church and repeating certain prayers.... I will try to bring those ideas before 
you. 

I have told you how the Indian philosopher reduces the whole universe into two 

A. 

parts — Prana and Akasha. 

Prana means force — all that is manifesting itself as movement or possible 
movement, force, or attraction. ... Electricity, magnetism, all the movements in 
the body, all [the movements] in the mind — all these are various 
manifestations of one thing called Prana. The best form of Prana, however, is in 
[the brain], manifesting itself as light [of understanding]. This light is under the 
guidance of thought. 

The mind ought to control every bit of Prana that has been worked up in the 
body.... [The] mind should have entire control of the body. That is not [the 
case] with all. With most of us it is the other way. The mind should be able to 
control every part of [the body] just at will. That is reason, philosophy; but 
[when] we come to matters of fact, it is not so. For you, on the other hand, the 
cart is before the horse. It is the body mastering the mind. If my finger gets 
pinched, I become sorry. The body works upon the mind. If anything happens 
which I do not like to happen, I am worried; my mind [is] thrown off its 
balance. The body is master of the mind. We have become bodies. We are 
nothing else but bodies just now. 

Here [comes] the philosopher to show us the way out, to teach us what we 








really are. You may reason it out and understand it intellectually, but there is a 
long way between intellectual understanding and the practical realisation of it. 
Between the plan of the building and the building itself there is quite a long 
distance. Therefore there must be various methods [to reach the goal of 
religion]. In the last course, we have been studying the method of philosophy, 
trying to bring everything under control, once more asserting the freedom of 
the soul.... "It is very difficult. This way is not for [everyjbody. The embodied 
mind tries it with great trouble" (Gita, XII. 5). 

A little physical help will make the mind comfortable. What would be more 
rational than to have the mind itself accomplish the thing? But it cannot. The 
physical help is necessary for most of us. The system of Raj a-Yoga is to utilise 
these physical helps, to make use of the powers and forces in the body to 
produce certain mental states, to make the mind stronger and stronger until it 
regains its lost empire. By sheer force of will if anyone can attain to that, so 
much the better. But most of us cannot, so we will use physical means, and 
help the will on its way. 

... The whole universe is a tremendous case of unity in variety. There is only 
one mass of mind. Different [states] of that mind have different names. [They 
are] different little whirlpools in this ocean of mind. We are universal and 
individual at the same time. Thus is the play going on.... In reality this unity is 
never broken. [Matter, mind, spirit are all one.] 

All these are but various names. There is but one fact in the universe, and we 
look at it from various standpoints. The same [fact] looked at from one 
standpoint becomes matter. The same one from another standpoint becomes 
mind. There are not two things. Mistaking the rope for the snake, fear came [to 
a man] and made him call somebody else to kill the snake. [His] nervous 
system began to shake; his heart began to beat.... All these manifestations 
[came] from fear, and he discovered it was a rope, and they all vanished. This 
is what we see in reality. What even the senses see — what we call matter — 
that [too] is the Real; only not as we have seen it. The mind [which] saw the 
rope [and] took it for a snake was not under a delusion. If it had been, it would 
not have seen anything. One thing is taken for another, not as something that 
does not exist. What we see here is body, and we take the Infinite as matter.... 



We are but seeking that Reality. We are never deluded. We always know truth, 
only our reading of truth is mistaken at times. You can perceive only one thing 
at a time. When I see the snake, the rope has vanished entirely. And when I see 
the rope, the snake has vanished. It must be one thing.... 

When we see the world, how can we see God? Think in your own mind. What 
is meant by the world is God as seen as all things [by] our senses. Here you see 
the snake; the rope is not. When you know the Spirit, everything else will 
vanish. When you see the Spirit itself, you see no matter, because that which 
you called matter is the very thing that is Spirit. All these variations are 
[superimposed] by our senses. The same sun, reflected by a thousand little 
waveless, will represent to us thousands of little suns. If I am looking at the 
universe with my senses, I interpret it as matter and force. It is one and many at 
the same time. The manifold does not destroy the unity. The millions of waves 
do not destroy the unity of the ocean. It remains the same ocean. When you 
look at the universe, remember that we can reduce it to matter or to force. If we 
increase the velocity, the mass decreases.... On the other hand, we can increase 
the mass and decrease the velocity.... We may almost come to a point where all 
the mass will entirely disappear. ... 

Matter cannot be said to cause force nor [can] force [be] the cause of matter. 
Both are so [related] that one may disappear in the other. There must be a third 
[factor], and that third something is the mind. You cannot produce the universe 
from matter, neither from force. Mind is something [which is] neither force nor 
matter, yet begetting force and matter all the time. In the long run, mind is 
begetting all force, and that is what is meant by the universal mind, the sum 
total of all minds. Everyone is creating, and [in] the sum total of all these 
creations you have the universe — unity in diversity. It is one and it is many at 
the same time. 

The Personal God is only the sum total of all, and yet it is an individual by 
itself, just as you are the individual body of which each cell is an individual 
part itself. 

Everything that has motion is included in Prana or force. [It is] this Prana 
which is moving the stars, sun, moon; Prana is gravitation.... 



All forces of nature, therefore, must be created by the universal mind. And we, 
as little bits of mind, [are] taking out that Prana from nature, working it out 
again in our own nature, moving our bodies and manufacturing our thought. If 
[you think] thought cannot be manufactured, stop eating for twenty days and 
see how you feel. Begin today and count. ... Even thought is manufactured by 
food. There is no doubt about it. 

Control of this Prana that is working everything, control of this Prana in the 
body, is called Pranayama. We see with our common sense that it is the breath 
[that] is setting everything in motion. If I stop breathing, I stop. If the breath 
begins, [the body] begins to move. What we want to get at is not the breath 
itself; it is something finer behind the breath. 

[There was once a minister to a great king. The] king, displeased with the 
minister, ordered him to be confined in the top of [a very high tower. This was 
done, and the minister was left there to perish. His wife canine to the tower at 
night and called to her husband.] The minister said to her, "No use weeping." 
He told her to take a little honey, [a beetle], a pack of fine thread, a ball of 
twine, and a rope. She tied the fine thread to one of the legs of the beetle and 
put honey on the top of its head and let it go [with its head up]. [The beetle 
slowly crept onwards, in the hope of reaching the honey, until at last it reached 
the top of the tower, when the minister grasped the beetle, and got possession 
of the silken thread, then the pack thread, then the stout twine, and lastly of the 
rope. The minister descended from the tower by means of the rope, and made 
his escape. In this body of ours the breath motion is the "silken thread"; by 
laying hold of it we grasp the pack thread of the nerve currents, and from these 
the stout twine of our thoughts, and lastly the rope of Prana, controlling which 
we reach freedom. {Vide ante .) 

By the help of things on the material plane, we have to come to finer and finer 
[perceptions]. The universe is one, whatever point you touch. All the points are 
but variations of that one point. Throughout the universe is a unity (at 
bottom).... Even through such a gross thing as breath I can get hold of the Spirit 
itself. 


By the exercise of breathing we begin to feel all the movements of the body 



that we [now] do not feel. As soon as we begin to feel them, we begin to master 
them. Thoughts in the germ will open to us, and we will be able to get hold of 
them. Of course, not all of us have the opportunity nor the will nor the patience 
nor the faith to pursue such a thing; but there is the common sense idea that is 
of some benefit to everyone. 

The first benefit is health. Ninety-nine per cent of us do not at all breathe 
properly. We do not inflate the lungs enough.... Regularity [of breath] will 
purify the body. It quiets the mind.... When you are peaceful, your breath is 
going on peacefully, [it is] rhythmic. If the breath is rhythmic, you must be 
peaceful. When the mind is disturbed, the breath is broken. If you can bring the 
breath into rhythm forcibly by practice, why can you not become peaceful? 
When you are disturbed, go into the room and close the door. Do not try to 
control the mind, but go on with rhythmic breathing for ten minutes. The heart 
will become peaceful. These are common sense benefits that come to everyone. 
The others belong to the Yogi.... 

Deep-breathing exercises [are only the first step]. There are about eighty-four 
[postures for] various exercises. Some [people] have taken up this breathing as 
the whole [pursuit] of life. They do not do anything without consulting the 
breath. They are all the time [observing] in which nostril there is more breath. 
When it is the right, [they] will do certain things, and when [it is] the left, they 
do other things. When [the breath is] flowing equally through both nostrils, 
they will worship. 

When the breath is coming rhythmically through both nostrils, that is the time 
to control your mind. By means of the breath you can make the currents of the 
body move through any part of the body, just [at] will. Whenever [any] part of 
the body is ill, send the Prana to that part, all by the breath. 

Various other things are done. There are sects who are trying not to breathe at 
all. They would not do anything that would make them breathe hard. They go 
into a sort of trance.... Scarcely any part of the body [functions]. The heart 
almost ceases [to beat].... Most of these exercises are very dangerous; the 
higher methods [are] for acquiring higher powers. There are whole sects trying 
to [lighten] the whole body by withdrawal of breath and then they will rise up 


in the air. I have never seen anyone rise.... I have never seen anyone fly through 
the air, but the books say so. I do not pretend to know everything. All the time I 
am seeing most wonderful things.... [Once I observed a] man bringing out fruits 
and flowers, etc. [out of nowhere]. 

... The Yogi, when he becomes perfect, can make his body so small it will pass 
through this wall — this very body. He can become so heavy, two hundred 
persons cannot lift him. He will be able to fly through the air if he likes. [But] 
nobody can be as powerful as God Himself. If they could, and one created, 
another would destroy.... 

This is in the books. I can [hardly] believe them, nor do I disbelieve them. 

What I have seen I take.... 

If the study [improvement?] of things in this world is possible, it is not by 
competition, it is by regulating the mind. Western people say, "That is our 
nature; we cannot help it." Studying your social problems, [I conclude] you 
cannot solve them either. In some things you are worse off than we are,... and 
all these things do not bring the world anywhere at all... 

The strong take everything; the weak go to the wall. The poor are wading.... 

The man who can take, will take everything. The poor hate that man. Why? 
Because they are waiting their turn. All the systems they invent, they all teach 
the same thing. The problem can only be solved in the mind of man.... No law 
will ever make him do what he does not want to do. ... It is only if [man] wills 
to be good that he will be good. All the law and juries ... cannot make him 
good. The almighty man says, "I do not care." ... The only solution is if we all 
want to be good. How can that be done? 

All knowledge is within [the] mind. Who saw knowledge in the stone, or 
astronomy in the star? It is all in the human being. 

Let us realise [that] we are the infinite power. Who put a limit to the power of 
mind? Let us realise we are all mind. Every drop has the whole of the ocean in 
it. That is the mind of man. The Indian mind reflects upon these [powers and 
potentialities] and wants to bring [them] all out. For himself he doesn't care 
what happens. It will take a great length of time [to reach perfection]. If it takes 


fifty thousand years, what of that! ... 

The very foundation of society, the formation of it, makes the defect. 
[Perfection] is only possible if the mind of man is changed, if he, of his own 
sweet will, changes his mind; and the great difficulty is, neither can he force his 
own mind. 

You may not believe in all the claims of this Raj a-Yoga. It is absolutely 
necessary that every individual can become divine. That is only [possible] 
when every individual has absolute mastery over his own thoughts.... [The 
thoughts, the senses] should be all my servants, not my masters. Then only is it 
possible that evils will vanish.... 

Education is not filling the mind with a lot of facts. Perfecting the instrument 
and getting complete mastery of my own mind [is the ideal of education]. If I 
want to concentrate my mind upon a point, it goes there, and the moment I call, 
it is free [again].... 

That is the great difficulty. By great struggle we get a certain power of 
concentration, the power of attachment of the mind to certain things. But then 
there is not the power of detachment. I would give half my life to take my mind 
off that object! I cannot. It is the power of concentration and attachment as well 
as the power of detachment [that we must develop]. [If] the man [is] equally 
powerful in both — that man has attained manhood. You cannot make him 
miserable even if the whole universe tumbles about his ears. What books can 
teach you that? You may read any amount of books.... Crowd into the child 
fifty thousand words a moment, teach him all the theories and philosophies.... 
There is only one science that will teach him facts, and that is psychology.... 
And the work begins with control of the breath. 

Slowly and gradually you get into the chambers of the mind and gradually get 
control of the mind. It is a long, [hard struggle]. It must not be taken up as 
something curious. When one wants to do something, he has a plan. [Raja- 
Yoga] proposes no faith, no belief, no God. If you believe in two thousand 
gods, you can try that. Why not? ... [But in Raj a-Yoga] it is impersonal 
principles. 



The greatest difficulty is what? We talk and theorise The vast majority of 
mankind must deal with things that are concrete. For the dull people cannot see 
all the highest philosophy. Thus it ends. You may be graduates [in] all sciences 
in the world,... but if you have not realised, you must become a baby and learn. 

...If you give them things in the abstract and infinite, they get lost. Give them 
things [to do,] a little at a time [Tell them,] "You take [in] so many breaths, you 
do this." They go on, [they] understand it, and find pleasure in it. These are the 
kindergartens of religion. That is why breathing exercises will be so beneficial. 
I beg you all not to be merely curious. Practise a few days, and if you do not 
find any benefit, then come and curse me.... 

The whole universe is a mass of energy, and it is present at every point. One 
grain is enough for all of us, if we know how to get what there is.... 

This having to do is the poison that is killing us.... [Duty is] what pleases 
slaves.... [But] I am free! What I do is my play. [I am not a slave. I am] having 
a little fun — that is all.... 

The departed spirits — they are weak, are trying to get vitality from us.... 

Spiritual vitality can be given from one mind to another. The man who gives is 
the Guru. The man who receives is the disciple. That is the only way spiritual 
truth is brought into the world. 

[At death] all the senses go into the [mind] and the mind goes into Prana, 
vitality. The soul goes out and carries part of the mind out with him. He carries 
a certain part of the vitality, and he carries a certain amount of very fine 
material also, as the germ of the spiritual body. The Prana cannot exist without 
some sort of [vehicle].... It gets lodgement in the thoughts, and it will come out 
again. So you manufacture this new body and new brain. Through that it will 
manifest.... 

[Departed spirits] cannot manufacture a body; and those that are very weak do 
not remember that they are dead.... They try to get more enjoyment from this 
[spirit] life by getting into the bodies of others, and any person who opens his 




body to them runs a terrible risk. They seek his vitality.... 

In this world nothing is permanent except God.... Salvation means knowing the 
truth. We do not become anything; we are what we are. Salvation [comes] by 
faith and not by work. It is a question of knowledgel You must know what you 
are, and it is done. The dream vanishes. This you [and others] are dreaming 
here. When they die, they go to [the] heaven [of their dream]. They live in that 
dream, and [when it ends], they take a nice body [here], and they are good 
people.... 

[The wise man says,] "All these [desires] have vanished from me. This time I 
will not go through all this paraphernalia." He tries to get knowledge and 
struggles hard, and he sees what a dream, what a nightmare this is - [this 
dreaming], and working up heavens and worlds and worse. He laughs at it. 

[According to SWAMI VIVEKANANDA HIS SECOND VISIT TO THE WEST (P. 461), this 
address was delivered on 29 March 1900 under the title "The Science of Breathing". — Ed.] 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

PRACTICAL RELIGION: BREATHING AND MEDITATION 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, April 5, 1900) 

Everyone's idea of practical religion is according to his theory of practicality 
and the standpoint he starts from. There is work. There is the system of 
worship. There is knowledge. 

The philosopher thinks ... the difference between bondage and freedom is only 
caused by knowledge and ignorance. To him, knowledge is the goal, and his 
practicality is gaining that knowledge.... The worshipper's practical religion is 
the power of love and devotion. The worker's practical religion consists in 
doing good works. And so, as in every other thing, we are always trying to 
ignore the standard of another, trying to bind the whole world to our standard. 

Doing good to his fellow-beings is the practical religion of the man full of love. 
If men do not help to build hospitals, he thinks that they have no religion at all. 
But there is no reason why everyone should do that. The philosopher, in the 
same way, may denounce every man who does not have knowledge. People 
may build twenty thousand hospitals, and the philosopher declares they are but 
... the beasts of burden of the gods. The worshipper has his own idea and 
standard: Men who cannot love God are no good, whatever work they do. The 
[Yogi believes in] psychic [control and] the conquest of [internal] nature. "How 
much have you gained towards that? How much control over your senses, over 
your body?"— that is all the Yogi asks. And, as we said, each one judges the 
others by his own standard. Men may have given millions of dollars and fed 
rats and cats, as some do in India. They say that men can take care of 
themselves, but the poor animals cannot. That is their idea. But to the Yogi the 
goal is conquest of [internal] nature, and he judges man by that standard.... 

We are always talking [about] practical religion. But it must be practical in our 







sense. Especially [so] in the Western countries. The Protestants' ideal is good 
works. They do not care much for devotion and philosophy. They think there is 
not much in it. "What is your knowledge!" [they say]. "Man has to do 
something!" ... A little humanitarianism! The churches rail day and night 
against callous agnosticism. Yet they seem to be veering rapidly towards just 
that. Callous slaves! Religion of utility! That is the spirit just now. And that is 
why some Buddhists have become so popular in the West. People do not know 
whether there is a God or not, whether there is a soul or not. [They think :] This 
world is full of misery. Try to help this world. 

The Yoga doctrine, which we are having our lecture on, is not from that 
standpoint. [It teaches that] there is the soul, and inside this soul is all power. It 
is already there, and if we can master this body, all the power will be unfolded. 
All knowledge is in the soul. Why are people struggling? To lessen the 
misery.... All unhappiness is caused by our not having mastery over the body.... 
We are all putting the cart before the horse.... Take the system of work, for 
instance. We are trying to do good by ... comforting the poor. We do not get to 
the cause which created the misery. It is like taking a bucket to empty out the 
ocean, and more [water] comes all the time. The Yogi sees that this is 
nonsense. [He says that] the way out of misery is to know the cause of misery 
first.... We try to do the good we can. What for? If there is an incurable disease, 
why should we struggle and take care of ourselves? If the utilitarians say: "Do 
not bother about soul and God!" what is that to the Yogi and what is it to the 
world? The world does not derive any good [from such an attitude]. More and 
more misery is going on all the time.... 

The Yogi says you are to go to the root of all this. Why is there misery in the 
world? He answers: "It is all our own foolishness, not having proper mastery of 
our own bodies. That is all." He advises the means by which this misery can be 
[overcome]. If you can thus get mastery of your body, all the misery of the 
world will vanish. Every hospital is praying that more and more sick people 
will come there. Every time you think of doing some charity, you think there is 
some beggar to take your charity. If you say, "O Lord, let the world be full of 
charitable people!" — you mean, let the world be full of beggars also. Let the 
world be full of good works - let the world be full of misery. This is out-and- 
out slavishness! 



... The Yogi says, religion is practical if you know first why misery exists. All 
the misery in the world is in the senses. Is there any ailment in the sun, moon, 
and stars? The same fire that cooks your meal burns the child. Is it the fault of 
the fire? Blessed be the fire! Blessed be this electricity! It gives light.... Where 
can you lay the blame? Not on the elements. The world is neither good nor bad; 
the world is the world. The fire is the fire. If you burn your finger in it, you are 
a fool. If you [cook your meal and with it satisfy your hunger,] you are a wise 
man. That is all the difference. Circumstances can never be good or bad. Only 
the individual man can be good or bad. What is meant by the world being good 
or bad? Misery and happiness can only belong to the sensuous individual man. 

The Yogis say that nature is the enjoyed; the soul is the enjoyer. All misery and 
happiness — where is it? In the senses. It is the touch of the senses that causes 
pleasure and pain, heat and cold. If we can control the senses and order what 
they shall feel — not let them order us about as they are doing now — if they 
can obey our commands, become our servants, the problem is solved at once. 
We are bound by the senses; they play upon us, make fools of us all the time. 

Here is a bad odour. It will bring me unhappiness as soon as it touches my 
nose. I am the slave of my nose. If I am not its slave, I do not care. A man 
curses me. His curses enter my ears and are retained in my mind and body. If I 
am the master, I shall say: "Let these things go; they are nothing to me. I am 
not miserable. I do not bother." This is the outright, pure, simple, clear-cut 
truth. 

The other problem to be solved is — is it practical? Can man attain to the 
power of mastery of the body? ... Yoga says it is practical.... Supposing it is 
not — suppose there are doubts in your mind. You have got to try it. There is 
no other way out.... 

You may do good works all the time. All the same, you will be the slave of 
your senses, you will be miserable and unhappy. You may study the philosophy 
of every religion. Men in this country carry loads and loads of books on their 
backs. They are mere scholars, slaves of the senses, and therefore happy and 
unhappy. They read two thousand books, and that is all right; but as soon as a 
little misery comes, they are worried, anxious.... You call yourselves men! You 






stand up ... and build hospitals. You are fools! 

What is the difference between men and animals? ... "Food and [sleep], 
procreation of the species, and fear exist in common with the animals. There is 
one difference: Man can control all these and become God, the master." 
Animals cannot do it. Animals can do charitable work. Ants do it. Dogs do it. 
What is the difference then? Men can be masters of themselves. They can resist 
the reaction to anything.... The animal cannot resist anything. He is held ... by 
the string of nature everywhere. That is all the distinction. One is the master of 
nature, the other the slave of nature. What is nature? The five senses.... 

[The conquest of internal nature] is the only way out, according to Yoga.... The 
thirst for God is religion.... Good works and all that [merely] make the mind a 
little quiet. To practice this — to be perfect — all depends upon our past. I 
have been studying [Yoga] all my life and have made very little progress yet. 
But I have got enough [result] to believe that this is the only true way. The day 
will come when I will be master of myself. If not in this life, [in another life]. I 
will struggle and never let go. Nothing is lost. If I die this moment, all my past 
struggles [will come to my help]. Have you not seen what makes the difference 
between one man and another? It is their past. The past habits make one man a 
genius and another man a fool. You may have the power of the past and can 
succeed in five minutes. None can predict the moment of time. We all have to 
attain [perfection] some time or other. 

The greater part of the practical lessons which the Yogi gives us is in the mind, 
the power of concentration and meditation.... We have become so materialistic. 
When we think of ourselves, we find only the body. The body has become the 
ideal, nothing else. Therefore a little physical help is necessary.... 

First, to sit in the posture In which you can sit still for a long time. All the 
nerve currents which are working pass along the spine. The spine is not 
intended to support the weight of the body. Therefore the posture must be such 
that the weight of the body is not on the spine. Let it be free from all pressure. 

There are some other preliminary things. There is the great question of food 
and exercise.... 


The food must be simple and taken several times [a day] instead of once or 
twice. Never get very hungry. "He who eats too much cannot be a Yogi. He 
who fasts too much cannot be a Yogi. He who sleeps too much cannot be a 
Yogi, nor he who keeps awake too much." (Gita, VI. 16.) He who does not do 
any work and he who works too hard cannot succeed. Proper food, proper 
exercise, proper sleep, proper wakefulness — these are necessary for any 
success. 

What the proper food is, what kind, we have to determine ourselves. Nobody 
can determine that [for us]. As a general practice, we have to shun exciting 
food.... We do not know how to vary our diet with our occupation. We always 
forget that it is the food out of which we manufacture everything we have. So 
the amount and kind of energy that we want, the food must determine.... 

Violent exercises are not all necessary.... If you want to be muscular. Yoga is 
not for you. You have to manufacture a finer organism than you have now. 
Violent exercises are positively hurtful.... Live amongst those who do not take 
too much exercise. If you do not take violent exercise, you will live longer. 

You do not want to burn out your lamp in muscles! People who work with their 
brains are the longest-lived people.... Do not burn the lamp quickly. Let it bum 
slowly and gently.... Every anxiety, every violent exercise physical and mental 
— [means] you are burning the lamp. 

The proper diet means, generally, simply do not eat highly spiced foods. There 
are three sorts of mind, says the Yogi, according to the elements of nature. One 
is the dull mind, which covers the luminosity of the soul. Then there is that 
which makes people active, and lastly, that which makes them calm and 
peaceful. 

Now there are persons born with the tendency to sleep all the time. Their taste 
will be towards that type of food which is rotting — crawling cheese. They will 
eat cheese that fairly jumps off the table. It is a natural tendency with them. 

Then active people. Their taste is for everything hot and pungent, strong 
alcohol.... 




Sattvika people are very thoughtful, quiet, and patient. They take food in small 
quantities, and never anything bad. 

I am always asked the question: "Shall I give up meat?" My Master said, "Why 
should you give up anything? It will give you up." Do not give up anything in 
nature. Make it so hot for nature that she will give you up. There will come a 
time when you cannot possibly eat meat. The very sight of it will disgust you. 
There will come a time when many things you are struggling to give up will be 
distasteful, positively loathsome. 

Then there are various sorts of breathing exercises. One consists of three parts: 
the drawing in of the breath, the holding of the breath — stopping still without 
breathing — and throwing the breath out. [Some breathing exercises] are rather 
difficult, and some of the complicated ones are attended with great danger if 
done without proper diet. I would not advise you to go through any one of these 
except the very simple ones. 

Take a deep breath and fill the lungs. Slowly throw the breath out. Take it 
through one nostril and fill the lungs, and throw it out slowly through the other 
nostril. Some of us do not breathe deeply enough. Others cannot fill the lungs 
enough. These breathings will correct that very much. Half an hour in the 
morning and half an hour in the evening will make you another person. This 
sort of breathing is never dangerous. The other exercises should be practiced 
very slowly. And measure your strength. If ten minutes are a drain, only take 
five. 

The Yogi is expected to keep his own body well. These various breathing 
exercises are a great help in regulating the different parts of the body. All the 
different parts are inundated with breath. It is through breath that we gain 
control of them all. Disharmony in parts of the body is controlled by more flow 
of the nerve currents towards them. The Yogi ought to be able to tell when in 
any part pain is caused by less vitality or more. He has to equalise that.... 

Another condition [for success in Yoga] is chastity. It is the corner-stone of all 
practice. Married or unmarried — perfect chastity. It is a long subject, of 
course, but I want to tell you: Public discussions of this subject are not to the 





taste of this country. These Western countries are full of the most degraded 
beings in the shape of teachers who teach men and women that if they are 
chaste they will be hurt. How do they gather all this? ... People come to me — 
thousands come every year — with this one question. Someone has told them 
that if they are chaste and pure they will be hurt physically.... How do these 
teachers know it? Have they been chaste? Those unchaste, impure fools, lustful 
creatures, want to drag the whole world down to their [level]! ... 

Nothing is gained except by sacrifice.... The holiest function of our human 
consciousness, the noblest, do not make it unclean! Do not degrade it to the 
level of the brutes.... Make yourselves decent men! ... Be chaste and pure! ... 
There is no other way. Did Christ find any other way? ... If you can conserve 
and use the energy properly, it leads you to God. Inverted, it is hell itself.... 

It is much easier to do anything upon the external plane, but the greatest 
conqueror in the world finds himself a mere child when he tries to control his 
own mind. This is the world he has to conquer — the greater and more difficult 
world to conquer. Do not despair! Awake, arise, and stop not until the goal is 
reached!... 


» 




Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 


Introduction 

Volume 1 

Volume 2 

Volume 3 

Volume 4 

Volume 5 

Volume 6 

Volume 7 

Volume 8 

Volume 9 
Unpublished 














INTRODUCTION 


Home / Complete-Works / 


OUR MASTER AND HIS MESSAGE 

In the four volumes (Now in nine volumes — Ed.) of the works of the Swami 
Vivekananda which are to compose the present edition, we have what is not 
only a gospel to the world at large, but also to its own children, the Charter of 
the Hindu Faith. What Hinduism needed, amidst the general disintegration of 
the modern era, was a rock where she could lie at anchor, an authoritative 
utterance in which she might recognise her self. And this was given to her, in 
these words and writings of the Swami Vivekananda. 

For the first time in history, as has been said elsewhere, Hinduism itself forms 
here the subject of generalisation of a Hindu mind of the highest order. For 
ages to come the Hindu man who would verify, the Hindu mother who would 
teach her children, what was the faith of their ancestors will turn to the pages of 
these books for assurance and light. Long after the English language has 
disappeared from India, the gift that has here been made, through that 
language, to the world, will remain and bear its fruit in East and West alike. 
What Hinduism had needed, was the organising and consolidating of its own 
idea. What the world had needed was a faith that had no fear of truth. Both 
these are found here. Nor could any greater proof have been given of the 
eternal vigour of the Sanatana Dharma, of the fact that India is as great in the 
present as ever in the past, than this rise of the individual who, at the critical 
moment, gathers up and voices the communal consciousness. 

That India should have found her own need satisfied only in carrying to the 
humanity outside her borders the bread of life is what might have been 
foreseen. Nor did it happen on this occasion for the first time. It was once 
before in sending out to the sister lands the message of a nation-making faith 
that India learnt as a whole to understand the greatness of her own thought — a 
self-unification that gave birth to modern Hinduism itself. Never may we allow 
it to be forgotten that on Indian soil first was heard the command from a 
Teacher to His disciples: "Go ye out into all the world, and preach the Gospel 
to every creature!" It is the same thought, the same impulse of love, taking to 
itself a new shape, that is uttered by the lips of the Swami Vivekananda, when 





to a great gathering in the West he says: "'If one religion true, then all the 
others also must be true. Thus the Hindu faith is yours as much as mine."' And 
again, in amplifieation of the same idea: "We Hindus do not merely tolerate, 
we unite ourselves with every religion, praying in the mosque of the 
Mohammedan, worshipping before the fire of the Zoroastrian, and kneeling to 
the cross of the Christian. We know that all religions alike, from the lowest 
fetishism to the highest absolutism, are but so many attempts of the human soul 
to grasp and realise the Infinite. So we gather all these flowers, and, binding 
them together with the cord of love, make them into a wonderful bouquet of 
worship." To the heart of this speaker, none was foreign or alien. For him, there 
existed only Humanity and Truth. 

Of the Swami's address before the Parliament of Religions, it may be said that 
when he began to speak it was of "the religious ideas of the Hindus", but when 
he ended, Hinduism had been created. The moment was ripe with this 
potentiality. The vast audience that faced him represented exclusively the 
occidental mind, but included some development of all that in this was most 
distinctive. Every nation in Europe has poured in its human contribution upon 
America, and notably upon Chicago, where the Parliament was held. Much of 
the best, as well as some of the worst, of modern effort and struggle, is at all 
times to be met with, within the frontiers of that Western Civic Queen, whose 
feet are upon the shores of Lake Michigan, as she sits and broods, with the light 
of the North in her eyes. There is very little in the modern consciousness, very 
little inherited from the past of Europe, that does not hold some outpost in the 
city of Chicago. And while the teeming life and eager interests of that centre 
may seem to some of us for the present largely a chaos, yet they are 
undoubtedly making for the revealing of some noble and slow-wrought ideal of 
human unity, when the days of their ripening shall be fully accomplished. 

Such was the psychological area, such the sea of mind, young, tumultuous, 
overflowing with its own energy and self-assurance, yet inquisitive and alert 
withal, which confronted Vivekananda when he rose to speak. Behind him, on 
the contrary, lay an ocean, calm with long ages of spiritual development. 

Behind him lay a world that dated itself from the Vedas, and remembered itself 
in the Upanishads, a world to which Buddhism was almost modern; a world 
that was filled with religious systems of faiths and creeds; a quiet land, steeped 


in the sunlight of the tropics, the dust of whose roads had been trodden by the 
feet of the saints for ages upon ages. Behind him, in short, lay India, with her 
thousands of years of national development, in which she had sounded many 
things, proved many things, and realised almost all, save only her own perfect 
unanimity, from end to end of her great expanse of time and space, as to certain 
fundamental and essential truths, held by all her people in common. 

These, then, were the two mind-floods, two immense rivers of thought, as it 
were. Eastern and modern, of which the yellow-clad wanderer on the platform 
of the Parliament of Religions formed for a moment the point of confluence. 
The formulation of the common bases of Hinduism was the inevitable result of 
the shock of their contact, in a personality, so impersonal. For it was no 
experience of his own that rose to the lips of the Swami Vivekananda there. He 
did not even take advantage of the occasion to tell the story of his Master. 
Instead of either of these, it was the religious consciousness of India that spoke 
through him, the message of his whole people, as determined by their whole 
past. And as he spoke, in the youth and noonday of the West, a nation, sleeping 
in the shadows of the darkened half of earth, on the far side of the Pacific, 
waited in spirit for the words that would be borne on the dawn that was 
travelling towards them, to reveal to them the secret of their own greatness and 
strength. 

Others stood beside the Swami Vivekananda, on the same platform as he, as 
apostles of particular creeds and churches. But it was his glory that he came to 
preach a religion to which each of these was, in his own words, "only a 
travelling, a coming up, of different men, and women, through various 
conditions and circumstances to the same goal". He stood there, as he declared, 
to tell of One who had said of them all, not that one or another was true, in this 
or that respect, or for this or that reason, but that "All these are threaded upon 
Me, as pearls upon a string. Wherever thou seest extraordinary holiness and 
extraordinary power, raising and purifying humanity, know thou that I am 
there." To the Hindu, says Vivekananda, "Man is not travelling from error to 
truth, but climbing up from truth to truth, from truth that is lower to truth that is 
higher." This, and the teaching of Mukti — the doctrine that "man is to become 
divine by realising the divine," that religion is perfected in us only when it has 
led us to "Him who is the one life in a universe of death. Him who is the 


constant basis of an ever-changing world, that One who is the only soul, of 
which all souls are but delusive manifestations" — may be taken as the two 
great outstanding truths whieh, authentieated by the longest and most eomplex 
experienee in human history, India proclaimed through him to the modern 
world of the West. 

For India herself, the short address forms, as has been said, a brief Charter of 
Enfranehisement. Hinduism in its wholeness the speaker bases on the Vedas, 
but he spiritualises our eoneeption of the word, even while he utters it. To him, 
all that is true is Veda. "By the Vedas," he says, "no books are meant. They 
mean the aceumulated treasury of spiritual laws discovered by different persons 
in different times." Incidentally, he diseloses his eoneeption of the Sanatana 
Dharma. "From the high spiritual flights of the Vedanta philosophy, of which 
the latest discoveries of science seem like eehoes, to the lowest ideas of 
idolatry with its multifarious mythology, the agnosticism of the Buddhists, and 
the atheism of the Jains, eaeh and all have a place in the Hindu's religion." To 
his mind, there could be no seet, no school, no sincere religious experience of 
the Indian people — however like an aberration it might seem to the individual 
— that might rightly be exeluded from the embrace of Hinduism. And of this 
Indian Mother-Chureh, aecording to him, the distinetive doctrine is that of the 
Ishta Devata, the right of each soul to choose its own path, and to seek God in 
its own way. No army, then, carries the banner of so wide an Empire as that of 
Hinduism, thus defined. For as her spiritual goal is the finding of God, even so 
is her spiritual rule the perfeet freedom of every soul to be itself. 

Yet would not this inelusion of all, this freedom of eaeh, be the glory of 
Hinduism that it is, were it not for her supreme call, of sweetest promise: 

"Hear, ye ehildren of immortal bliss! Even ye that dwell in higher spheres! For 
I have found that Ancient One who is beyond all darkness, all delusion. And 
knowing Him, ye also shall be saved from death." Here is the word for the sake 
of whieh all the rest exists and has existed. Here is the crowning realisation, 
into whieh all others are resolvable. When, in his lecture on "The Work Before 
Us," the Swami adjures all to aid him in the building of a temple wherein every 
worshipper in the land ean worship, a temple whose shrine shall contain only 
the word Om, there are some of us who eateh in the utterance the glimpse of a 
still greater temple — India herself, the Motherland, as she already exists — 






and see the paths, not of the Indian churehes alone, but of all Humanity, 
eonverging there, at the foot of that sacred place wherein is set the symbol that 
is no symbol, the name that is beyond all sound. It is to this, and not away from 
it, that all the paths of all the worships and all the religious systems lead. India 
is at one with the most puritan faiths of the world in her declaration that 
progress is from seen to unseen, from the many to the One, from the low to the 
high, from the form to the formless, and never in the reverse direction. She 
differs only in having a word of sympathy and promise for every sincere 
conviction, wherever and whatever it may be, as constituting a step in the great 
ascent. 

The Swami Vivekananda would have been less than he was, had anything in 
this Evangel of Hinduism been his own. Like the Krishna of the Gita, like 
Buddha, like Shankaracharya, like every great teacher that Indian thought has 
known, his sentences are laden with quotations from the Vedas and 
Upanishads. He stands merely as the Revealer, the Interpreter to India of the 
treasures that she herself possesses in herself. The truths he preaches would 
have been as true, had he never been born. Nay more, they would have been 
equally authentic. The difference would have lain in their difficulty of access, 
in their want of modern clearness and incisiveness of statement, and in their 
loss of mutual coherence and unity. Had he not lived, texts that today will carry 
the bread of life to thousands might have remained the obscure disputes of 
scholars. He taught with authority, and not as one of the Pandits. For he himself 
had plunged to the depths of the realisation which he preached, and he came 
back like Ramanuja only to tell its secrets to the pariah, the outcast, and the 
foreigner. 

And yet this statement that his teaching holds nothing new is not absolutely 
true. It must never be forgotten that it was the Swami Vivekananda who, while 
proclaiming the sovereignty of the Advaita Philosophy, as including that 
experience in which all is one, without a second, also added to Hinduism the 
doctrine that Dvaita, Vishishtadvaita, and Advaita are but three phases or 
stages in a single development, of which the last-named constitutes the goal. 
This is part and parcel of the still greater and more simple doctrine that the 
many and the One are the same Reality, perceived by the mind at different 
times and in different attitudes; or as Sri Ramakrishna expressed the same 


thing, "God is both with form and without form. And He is that which includes 
both form and formlessness." 

It is this which adds its crowning significance to our Master's life, for here he 
becomes the meeting-point, not only of East and West, but also of past and 
future. If the many and the One be indeed the same Reality, then it is not all 
modes of worship alone, but equally all modes of work, all modes of struggle, 
all modes of creation, which are paths of realisation. No distinction, henceforth, 
between sacred and secular. To labour is to pray. To conquer is to renounce. 
Life is itself religion. To have and to hold is as stern a trust as to quit and to 
avoid. 

This is the realisation which makes Vivekananda the great preacher of Karma, 
not as divorced from, but as expressing Jnana and Bhakti. To him, the 
workshop, the study, the farmyard, and the field are as true and fit scenes for 
the meeting of God with man as the cell of the monk or the door of the temple. 
To him, there is no difference between service of man and worship of God, 
between manliness and faith, between true righteousness and spirituality. All 
his words, from one point of view, read as a commentary upon this central 
conviction. "Art, science, and religion", he said once, "are but three different 
ways of expressing a single truth. But in order to understand this we must have 
the theory of Advaita." 

The formative influence that went to the determining of his vision may perhaps 
be regarded as threefold. There was, first, his literary education, in Sanskrit and 
English. The contrast between the two worlds thus opened to him carried with 
it a strong impression of that particular experience which formed the theme of 
the Indian sacred books. It was evident that this, if true at all, had not been 
stumbled upon by Indian sages, as by some others, in a kind of accident. Rather 
was it the subject-matter of a science, the object of a logical analysis that 
shrank from no sacrifice which the pursuit of truth demanded. 

In his Master, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, living and teaching in the temple- 
garden at Dakshineshwar, the Swami Vivekananda — "Naren" as he then was 
— found that verification of the ancient texts which his heart and his reason 
had demanded. Here was the reality which the books only brokenly described. 
Here was one to whom SamMhi was a constant mode of knowledge. Every 




hour saw the swing of the mind from the many to the One. Every moment 
heard the utterance of wisdom gathered superconsciously. Everyone about him 
caught the vision of the divine. Upon the disciple came the desire for supreme 
knowledge "as if it had been a fever". Yet he who was thus the living 
embodiment of the books was so unconsciously, for he had read none of them! 
In his Guru, Ramakrishna Paramahamsa, Vivekananda found the key to life. 

Even now, however, the preparation for his own task was not complete. He had 
yet to wander throughout the length and breadth of India, from the Himalayas 
to Cape Comorin, mixing with saints and scholars and simple souls alike, 
learning from all, teaching to all, and living with all, seeing India as she was 
and is, and so grasping in its comprehensiveness that vast whole, of which his 
Master's life and personality had been a brief and intense epitome. 

These, then — the Shastras, the Guru, and the Mother-land — are the three 
notes that mingle themselves to form the music of the works of Vivekananda. 
These are the treasure which it is his to offer. These furnish him with the 
ingredients whereof he compounds the world's heal-all of his spiritual bounty. 
These are the three lights burning within that single lamp which India by his 
hand lighted and set up, for the guidance of her own children and of the world 
in the few years of work between September 19, 1893 and July 4, 1902. And 
some of us there are, who, for the sake of that lighting, and of this record that 
he has left behind him, bless the land that bore him and the hands of those who 
sent him forth, and believe that not even yet has it been given to us to 
understand the vastness and significance of the message that he spoke. 

July 4, 1907 

N. of Rk — V. 


» 




Complete 

Works of 

Swami 

Vivekananda 

Volume 1 

Addresses at 
The Parliament 

of Religions 

Karma-Yoga 

Raja-Yoga 

Lectures and 

Discourses 




mm 


search this site! 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 



Ttt /Hindoo ?! Iiyifa- 

Chicago 1893 


» 























Complete 

Works of 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Addresses at The Parliament of 

Religions / 


Swami 

Vivekananda 


Volume 1 


« 

RESPONSE TO WELCOME 


At the World's Parliament of Religions, Chicago 
11th September, 1893 


Addresses at 
The 

Parliament 
of Religions 

Response to 

Welcome 


Why We 

Disagree 

Paper on 

Hinduism 


Religion not the 

Crying Need of 

India 


Buddhism, the 

Fulfilment of 

Hinduism 


Address at the 

Final Session 



Sisters and Brothers of America, 

It fills my heart with joy unspeakable to rise in response to the 
warm and cordial welcome which you haye giyen us. I thank 
you in the name of the most ancient order of monks in the 
world; I thank you in the name of the mother of religions; and 
I thank you in the name of millions and millions of Hindu 
people of all classes and sects. 

My thanks, also, to some of the speakers on this platform who, 
referring to the delegates from the Orient, haye told you that 
these men from far-off nations may well claim the honour of 
bearing to different lands the idea of toleration. I am proud to 
belong to a religion which has taught the world both tolerance 
and uniyersal acceptance. We belieye not only in uniyersal 
toleration, but we accept all religions as true. I am proud to 
belong to a nation which has sheltered the persecuted and the 
refugees of all religions and all nations of the earth. I am 
proud to tell you that we haye gathered in our bosom the 
purest remnant of the Israelites, who came to Southern India 
and took refuge with us in the yery year in which their holy 
temple was shattered to pieces by Roman tyranny. I am proud 
to belong to the religion which has sheltered and is still 
fostering the remnant of the grand Zoroastrian nation. I will 
quote to you, brethren, a few lines from a hymn which I 
remember to haye repeated from my earliest boyhood, which 
is eyery day repeated by millions of human beings: 'As the 
different streams having their sources in different places all 
mingle their water in the sea, so, O Lord, the different paths 
which men take through different tendencies, various though 
they appear, crooked or straight, all lead to TheeP 
































The present convention, which is one of the most august 
assemblies ever held, is in itself a vindication, a declaration to 
the world of the wonderful doctrine preached in the Gita: 
''Whosoever comes to Me, through whatsoever form, 1 reach 
him; all men are struggling through paths which in the end 
lead to me'’ Sectarianism, bigotry, and its horrible 
descendant, fanaticism, have long possessed this beautiful 
earth. They have filled the earth with violence, drenched it 
often and often with human blood, destroyed civilisation and 
sent whole nations to despair. Had it not been for these 
horrible demons, human society would be far more advanced 
than it is now. But their time is come; and I fervently hope 
that the bell that tolled this morning in honour of this 
convention may be the death-knell of all fanaticism, of all 
persecutions with the sword or with the pen, and of all 
uncharitable feelings between persons wending their way to 
the same goal. 

» 




