Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 2 

Work and its Secret 
The Powers of the Mind 
Hints on Practical Spirituality 

Bhakti or Devotion 

Jnana-Yoga 

Practical Vedanta and other lectures 

Reports in American Newspapers 










Swami Vivekananda 
January 12,1863- July 4,1902 



Chicago 1893 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / 


WORK AND ITS SECRET 

{Delivered at Los Angeles, California, January 4, 1900) 

One of the greatest lessons I have learnt in my life is to pay as much attention 
to the means of work as to its end. He was a great man from whom I learnt it, 
and his own life was a practical demonstration of this great principle I have 
been always learning great lessons from that one principle, and it appears to me 
that all the secret of success is there; to pay as much attention to the means as 
to the end. 

Our great defect in life is that we are so much drawn to the ideal, the goal is so 
much more enchanting, so much more alluring, so much bigger in our mental 
horizon, that we lose sight of the details altogether. 

But whenever failure comes, if we analyse it critically, in ninety-nine per cent 
of cases we shall find that it was because we did not pay attention to the means. 
Proper attention to the finishing, strengthening, of the means is what we need. 
With the means all right, the end must come. We forget that it is the cause that 
produces the effect; the effect cannot come by itself; and unless the causes are 
exact, proper, and powerful, the effect will not be produced. Once the ideal is 
chosen and the means determined, we may almost let go the ideal, because we 
are sure it will be there, when the means are perfected. When the cause is there, 
there is no more difficulty about the effect, the effect is bound to come. If we 
take care of the cause, the effect will take care of itself. The realization of the 
ideal is the effect. The means are the cause: attention to the means, therefore, is 
the great secret of life. We also read this in the Gita and learn that we have to 
work, constantly work with all our power; to put our whole mind in the work, 
whatever it be, that we are doing. At the same time, we must not be attached. 
That is to say, we must not be drawn away from the work by anything else; 
still, we must be able to quit the work whenever we like. 

If we examine our own lives, we find that the greatest cause of sorrow is this: 
we take up something, and put our whole energy on it — perhaps it is a failure 
and yet we cannot give it up. We know that it is hurting us, that any further 






clinging to it is simply bringing misery on us; still, we cannot tear ourselves 
away from it. The bee came to sip the honey, but its feet stuck to the honey-pot 
and it could not get away. Again and again, we are finding ourselves in that 
state. That is the whole secret of existence. Why are we here? We came here to 
sip the honey, and we find our hands and feet sticking to it. We are caught, 
though we came to catch. We came to enjoy; we are being enjoyed. We came 
to rule; we are being ruled. We came to work; we are being worked. All the 
time, we find that. And this comes into every detail of our life. We are being 
worked upon by other minds, and we are always struggling to work on other 
minds. We want to enjoy the pleasures of life; and they eat into our vitals. We 
want to get everything from nature, but we find in the long run that nature takes 
everything from us — depletes us, and casts us aside. 

Had it not been for this, life would have been all sunshine. Never mind! With 
all its failures and successes, with all its joys and sorrows, it can be one 
succession of sunshine, if only we are not caught. 

That is the one cause of misery: we are attached, we are being caught. 

Therefore says the Gita: Work constantly; work, but be not attached; be not 
caught. Reserve unto yourself the power of detaching yourself from everything, 
however beloved, however much the soul might yearn for it, however great the 
pangs of misery you feel if you were going to leave it; still, reserve the power 
of leaving it whenever you want. The weak have no place here, in this life or in 
any other life. Weakness leads to slavery. Weakness leads to all kinds of 
misery, physical and mental. Weakness is death. There are hundreds of 
thousands of microbes surrounding us, but they cannot harm us unless we 
become weak, until the body is ready and predisposed to receive them. There 
may be a million microbes of misery, floating about us. Never mind! They dare 
not approach us, they have no power to get a hold on us, until the mind is 
weakened. This is the great fact: strength is life, weakness is death. Strength is 
felicity, life eternal, immortal; weakness is constant strain and misery: 
weakness is death. 

Attachment is the source of all our pleasures now. We are attached to our 
friends, to our relatives; we are attached to our intellectual and spiritual works; 
we are attached to external objects, so that we get pleasure from them. What, 



again, brings misery but this very attachment? We have to detach ourselves to 
earn joy. If only we had power to detach ourselves at will, there would not be 
any misery. That man alone will be able to get the best of nature, who, having 
the power of attaching himself to a thing with all his energy, has also the power 
to detach himself when he should do so. The difficulty is that there must be as 
much power of attachment as that of detachment. There are men who are never 
attracted by anything. They can never love, they are hard-hearted and apathetic; 
they escape most of the miseries of life. But the wall never feels misery, the 
wall never loves, is never hurt; but it is the wall, after all. Surely it is better to 
be attached and caught, than to be a wall. Therefore the man who never loves, 
who is hard and stony, escaping most of the miseries of life, escapes also its 
joys. We do not want that. That is weakness, that is death. That soul has not 
been awakened that never feels weakness, never feels misery. That is a callous 
state. We do not want that. 

At the same time, we not only want this mighty power of love, this mighty 
power of attachment, the power of throwing our whole soul upon a single 
object, losing ourselves and letting ourselves be annihilated, as it were, for 
other souls — which is the power of the gods — but we want to be higher even 
than the gods. The perfect man can put his whole soul upon that one point of 
love, yet he is unattached. How comes this? There is another secret to learn. 

The beggar is never happy. The beggar only gets a dole with pity and scorn 
behind it, at least with the thought behind that the beggar is a low object. He 
never really enjoys what he gets. 

We are all beggars. Whatever we do, we want a return. We are all traders. We 
are traders in life, we are traders in virtue, we are traders in religion. And alas! 
we are also traders in love. 

If you come to trade, if it is a question of give-and-take, if it is a question of 
buy-and-sell, abide by the laws of buying and selling. There is a bad time and 
there is a good time; there is a rise and a fall in prices: always you expect the 
blow to come. It is like looking at the mirrors Your face is reflected: you make 
a grimace — there is one in the mirror; if you laugh, the mirror laughs. This is 
buying and selling, giving and taking. 




We get caught. How? Not by what we give, but by what we expect. We get 
misery in return for our love; not from the fact that we love, but from the fact 
that we want love in return. There is no misery where there is no want. Desire, 
want, is the father of all misery. Desires are bound by the laws of success and 
failure. Desires must bring misery. 

The great secret of true success, of true happiness, then, is this: the man who 
asks for no return, the perfectly unselfish man, is the most successful. It seems 
to be a paradox. Do we not know that every man who is unselfish in life gets 
cheated, gets hurt? Apparently, yes. "Christ was unselfish, and yet he was 
crucified." True, but we know that his unselfishness is the reason, the cause of 
a great victory — the crowning of millions upon millions of lives with the 
blessings of true success. 

Ask nothing; want nothing in return. Give what you have to give; it will come 
back to you — but do not think of that now, it will come back multiplied a 
thousandfold — but the attention must not be on that. Yet have the power to 
give: give, and there it ends. Learn that the whole of life is giving, that nature 
will force you to give. So, give willingly. Sooner or later you will have to give 
up. You come into life to accumulate. With clenched hands, you want to take. 
But nature puts a hand on your throat and makes your hands open. Whether 
you will it or not, you have to give. The moment you say, "I will not", the blow 
comes; you are hurt. None is there but will be compelled, in the long run, to 
give up everything. And the more one struggles against this law, the more 
miserable one feels. It is because we dare not give, because we are not resigned 
enough to accede to this grand demand of nature, that we are miserable. The 
forest is gone, but we get heat in return. The sun is taking up water from the 
ocean, to return it in showers. You are a machine for taking and giving: you 
take, in order to give. Ask, therefore, nothing in return; but the more you give, 
the more will come to you. The quicker you can empty the air out of this room, 
the quicker it will be filled up by the external air; and if you close all the doors 
and every aperture, that which is within will remain, but that which is outside 
will never come in, and that which is within will stagnate, degenerate, and 
become poisoned. A river is continually emptying itself into the ocean and is 
continually filling up again. Bar not the exit into the ocean. The moment you 
do that, death seizes you. 





Be, therefore, not a beggar; be unattached This is the most terrible task of life! 
You do not calculate the dangers on the path. Even by intellectually 
recognising the difficulties, we really do not know them until we feel them. 
From a distance we may get a general view of a park: well, what of that? We 
feel and really know it when we are in it. Even if our every attempt is a failure, 
and we bleed and are torn asunder, yet, through all this, we have to preserve 
our heart — we must assert our Godhead in the midst of all these difficulties. 
Nature wants us to react, to return blow for blow, cheating for cheating, lie for 
lie, to hit back with all our might. Then it requires a superdivine power not to 
hit back, to keep control, to be unattached. 

Every day we renew our determination to be unattached. We cast our eyes back 
and look at the past objects of our love and attachment, and feel how every one 
of them made us miserable. We went down into the depths of despondency 
because of our "love"! We found ourselves mere slaves in the hands of others, 
we were dragged down and down! And we make a fresh determination: 
"Henceforth, I will be master of myself; henceforth, I will have control over 
myself." But the time comes, and the same story once more! Again the soul is 
caught and cannot get out. The bird is in a net, struggling and fluttering. This is 
our life. 

I know the difficulties. Tremendous they are, and ninety per cent of us become 
discouraged and lose heart, and in our turn, often become pessimists and cease 
to believe in sincerity, love, and all that is grand and noble. So, we find men 
who in the freshness of their lives have been forgiving, kind, simple, and 
guileless, become in old age lying masks of men. Their minds are a mass of 
intricacy. There may be a good deal of external policy, possibly. They are not 
hot-headed, they do not speak, but it would be better for them to do so; their 
hearts are dead and, therefore, they do not speak. They do not curse, not 
become angry; but it would be better for them to be able to be angry, a 
thousand times better, to be able to curse. They cannot. There is death in the 
heart, for cold hands have seized upon it, and it can no more act, even to utter a 
curse, even to use a harsh word. 

All this we have to avoid: therefore I say, we require superdivine power. 



Superhuman power is not strong enough. Superdivine strength is the only way, 
the one way out. By it alone we can pass through all these intricacies, through 
these showers of miseries, unscathed. We may be cut to pieces, torn asunder, 
yet our hearts must grow nobler and nobler all the time. 

It is very difficult, but we can overcome the difficulty by constant practice. We 
must learn that nothing can happen to us, unless we make ourselves susceptible 
to it. I have just said, no disease can come to me until the body is ready; it does 
not depend alone on the germs, but upon a certain predisposition which is 
already in the body. We get only that for which we are fitted. Let us give up 
our pride and understand this, that never is misery undeserved. There never has 
been a blow undeserved: there never has been an evil for which I did not pave 
the way with my own hands. We ought to know that. Analyse yourselves and 
you will find that every blow you have received, came to you because you 
prepared yourselves for it. You did half, and the external world did the other 
half: that is how the blow came. That will sober us down. At the same time, 
from this very analysis will come a note of hope, and the note of hope is: "I 
have no control of the external world, but that which is in me and nearer unto 
me, my own world, is in my control. If the two together are required to make a 
failure, if the two together are necessary to give me a blow, I will not 
contribute the one which is in my keeping; and how then can the blow come? If 
I get real control of myself, the blow will never come." 

We are all the time, from our childhood, trying to lay the blame upon 
something outside ourselves. We are always standing up to set right other 
people, and not ourselves. If we are miserable, we say, "Oh, the world is a 
devil's world." We curse others and say, "What infatuated fools!" But why 
should we be in such a world, if we really are so good? If this is a devil's world, 
we must be devils also; why else should we be here? "Oh, the people of the 
world are so selfish!" True enough; but why should we be found in that 
company, if we be better? Just think of that. 

We only get what we deserve. It is a lie when we say, the world is bad and we 
are good. It can never be so. It is a terrible lie we tell ourselves. 

This is the first lesson to learn: be determined not to curse anything outside, not 


to lay the blame upon any one outside, but be a man, stand up, lay the blame on 
yourself. You will find, that is always true. Get hold of yourself. 

Is it not a shame that at one moment we talk so much of our manhood, of our 
being gods — that we know everything, we can do everything, we are 
blameless, spotless, the most unselfish people in the world; and at the next 
moment a little stone hurts us, a little anger from a little Jack wounds us — any 
fool in the street makes "these gods" miserable! Should this be so if we are 
such gods? Is it true that the world is to blame? Could God, who is the purest 
and the noblest of souls, be made miserable by any of our tricks? If you are so 
unselfish, you are like God. What world can hurt you? You would go through 
the seventh hell unscathed, untouched. But the very fact that you complain and 
want to lay the blame upon the external world shows that you feel the external 
world — the very fact that you feel shows that you are not what you claim to 
be. You only make your offence greater by heaping misery upon misery, by 
imagining that the external world is hurting you, and crying out, "Oh, this 
devil's world! This man hurts me; that man hurts me! " and so forth. It is 
adding lies to misery. 

We are to take care of ourselves — that much we can do — and give up 
attending to others for a time. Let us perfect the means; the end will take care 
of itself. For the world can be good and pure, only if our lives are good and 
pure. It is an effect, and we are the means. Therefore, let us purify ourselves. 
Let us make ourselves perfect. 


» 






COMPLETE WORKS OF SWAMIVIVEKANANDA 


“I fervently hope that the bell that tolled this morning in honour of this 
convention may be the death-knell of all fanaticism, of all persecutions with the 
sword or with the pen, and of all uncharitable feelings between persons 
wending their way to the same goal ” 

Swami Vivekananda 
Representative of Hindus 
Parliament of Religions 
Columbian Exposition, Chicago World Fair 

11 September 1893. 


Click here to start 


Note: This represents the text of the entire nine volumes of the Complete Works of Swami 
Vivekananda, including the footnotes and two unpublished letters obtained from the 
Ramakrishna Vedanta Society of Boston’s website. Most of the footnotes will appear as pop-up 
windows. It will be necessary to exit a pop-up window by clicking the X mark at the top right 
hand corner of a pop-up window to enable the next to appear. The parent window will not 
refresh when a pop-up window appears in Internet Explorer, but might refresh with older 
versions of Netscape. To return to the original location of the parent window, it may then be 
necessary to first close the pop-up window, and then click the “back” button. If there are any 
links that do not work, or if there is any difference from the original printed version, please 
send a mail to devotee @ ramakrishnavivekananda. info . 

Acknowledgements: 

1. Special thanks to Swami Bodhasaranandaji of Advaita Ashrama , Kolkata, India, for his 
whole-hearted support for this project. 

2. Special thanks to the volunteer who has so graciously agreed to proof read Volume 1 and 
wishes to remain annonymous. 

3. The Devanagari font used has been prepared by Murari Dasa and used with his permission. It 
is available at www.ksvberspace.com/fonts/ as a free download. The material in Devanagari 
font is included in graphics mode and so it is not necessary to install the Devanagari fonts to 
see the Sanskrit quotes used by Swami Vivekananda. 








Home / Complete-Works / Volume 1 / Lectures and Discourses / 

« 

PRACTICAL RELIGION: BREATHING AND MEDITATION 

This article was recorded by Ida Ansell in shorthand. As, however, Swamiji's speed was too 
great for her in her early days, dots are put in the articles to indicate the omissions, while the 
words within square brackets are added by way of linking up the disconnected parts. 

{Delivered in San Francisco, April 5, 1900) 

Everyone's idea of practical religion is according to his theory of practicality 
and the standpoint he starts from. There is work. There is the system of 
worship. There is knowledge. 

The philosopher thinks ... the difference between bondage and freedom is only 
caused by knowledge and ignorance. To him, knowledge is the goal, and his 
practicality is gaining that knowledge.... The worshipper's practical religion is 
the power of love and devotion. The worker's practical religion consists in 
doing good works. And so, as in every other thing, we are always trying to 
ignore the standard of another, trying to bind the whole world to our standard. 

Doing good to his fellow-beings is the practical religion of the man full of love. 
If men do not help to build hospitals, he thinks that they have no religion at all. 
But there is no reason why everyone should do that. The philosopher, in the 
same way, may denounce every man who does not have knowledge. People 
may build twenty thousand hospitals, and the philosopher declares they are but 
... the beasts of burden of the gods. The worshipper has his own idea and 
standard: Men who cannot love God are no good, whatever work they do. The 
[Yogi believes in] psychic [control and] the conquest of [internal] nature. "How 
much have you gained towards that? How much control over your senses, over 
your body?"— that is all the Yogi asks. And, as we said, each one judges the 
others by his own standard. Men may have given millions of dollars and fed 
rats and cats, as some do in India. They say that men can take care of 
themselves, but the poor animals cannot. That is their idea. But to the Yogi the 
goal is conquest of [internal] nature, and he judges man by that standard.... 

We are always talking [about] practical religion. But it must be practical in our 







sense. Especially [so] in the Western countries. The Protestants' ideal is good 
works. They do not care much for devotion and philosophy. They think there is 
not much in it. "What is your knowledge!" [they say]. "Man has to do 
something!" ... A little humanitarianism! The churches rail day and night 
against callous agnosticism. Yet they seem to be veering rapidly towards just 
that. Callous slaves! Religion of utility! That is the spirit just now. And that is 
why some Buddhists have become so popular in the West. People do not know 
whether there is a God or not, whether there is a soul or not. [They think :] This 
world is full of misery. Try to help this world. 

The Yoga doctrine, which we are having our lecture on, is not from that 
standpoint. [It teaches that] there is the soul, and inside this soul is all power. It 
is already there, and if we can master this body, all the power will be unfolded. 
All knowledge is in the soul. Why are people struggling? To lessen the 
misery.... All unhappiness is caused by our not having mastery over the body.... 
We are all putting the cart before the horse.... Take the system of work, for 
instance. We are trying to do good by ... comforting the poor. We do not get to 
the cause which created the misery. It is like taking a bucket to empty out the 
ocean, and more [water] comes all the time. The Yogi sees that this is 
nonsense. [He says that] the way out of misery is to know the cause of misery 
first.... We try to do the good we can. What for? If there is an incurable disease, 
why should we struggle and take care of ourselves? If the utilitarians say: "Do 
not bother about soul and God!" what is that to the Yogi and what is it to the 
world? The world does not derive any good [from such an attitude]. More and 
more misery is going on all the time.... 

The Yogi says you are to go to the root of all this. Why is there misery in the 
world? He answers: "It is all our own foolishness, not having proper mastery of 
our own bodies. That is all." He advises the means by which this misery can be 
[overcome]. If you can thus get mastery of your body, all the misery of the 
world will vanish. Every hospital is praying that more and more sick people 
will come there. Every time you think of doing some charity, you think there is 
some beggar to take your charity. If you say, "O Lord, let the world be full of 
charitable people!" — you mean, let the world be full of beggars also. Let the 
world be full of good works - let the world be full of misery. This is out-and- 
out slavishness! 



... The Yogi says, religion is practical if you know first why misery exists. All 
the misery in the world is in the senses. Is there any ailment in the sun, moon, 
and stars? The same fire that cooks your meal burns the child. Is it the fault of 
the fire? Blessed be the fire! Blessed be this electricity! It gives light.... Where 
can you lay the blame? Not on the elements. The world is neither good nor bad; 
the world is the world. The fire is the fire. If you burn your finger in it, you are 
a fool. If you [cook your meal and with it satisfy your hunger,] you are a wise 
man. That is all the difference. Circumstances can never be good or bad. Only 
the individual man can be good or bad. What is meant by the world being good 
or bad? Misery and happiness can only belong to the sensuous individual man. 

The Yogis say that nature is the enjoyed; the soul is the enjoyer. All misery and 
happiness — where is it? In the senses. It is the touch of the senses that causes 
pleasure and pain, heat and cold. If we can control the senses and order what 
they shall feel — not let them order us about as they are doing now — if they 
can obey our commands, become our servants, the problem is solved at once. 
We are bound by the senses; they play upon us, make fools of us all the time. 

Here is a bad odour. It will bring me unhappiness as soon as it touches my 
nose. I am the slave of my nose. If I am not its slave, I do not care. A man 
curses me. His curses enter my ears and are retained in my mind and body. If I 
am the master, I shall say: "Let these things go; they are nothing to me. I am 
not miserable. I do not bother." This is the outright, pure, simple, clear-cut 
truth. 

The other problem to be solved is — is it practical? Can man attain to the 
power of mastery of the body? ... Yoga says it is practical.... Supposing it is 
not — suppose there are doubts in your mind. You have got to try it. There is 
no other way out.... 

You may do good works all the time. All the same, you will be the slave of 
your senses, you will be miserable and unhappy. You may study the philosophy 
of every religion. Men in this country carry loads and loads of books on their 
backs. They are mere scholars, slaves of the senses, and therefore happy and 
unhappy. They read two thousand books, and that is all right; but as soon as a 
little misery comes, they are worried, anxious.... You call yourselves men! You 






stand up ... and build hospitals. You are fools! 

What is the difference between men and animals? ... "Food and [sleep], 
procreation of the species, and fear exist in common with the animals. There is 
one difference: Man can control all these and become God, the master." 
Animals cannot do it. Animals can do charitable work. Ants do it. Dogs do it. 
What is the difference then? Men can be masters of themselves. They can resist 
the reaction to anything.... The animal cannot resist anything. He is held ... by 
the string of nature everywhere. That is all the distinction. One is the master of 
nature, the other the slave of nature. What is nature? The five senses.... 

[The conquest of internal nature] is the only way out, according to Yoga.... The 
thirst for God is religion.... Good works and all that [merely] make the mind a 
little quiet. To practice this — to be perfect — all depends upon our past. I 
have been studying [Yoga] all my life and have made very little progress yet. 
But I have got enough [result] to believe that this is the only true way. The day 
will come when I will be master of myself. If not in this life, [in another life]. I 
will struggle and never let go. Nothing is lost. If I die this moment, all my past 
struggles [will come to my help]. Have you not seen what makes the difference 
between one man and another? It is their past. The past habits make one man a 
genius and another man a fool. You may have the power of the past and can 
succeed in five minutes. None can predict the moment of time. We all have to 
attain [perfection] some time or other. 

The greater part of the practical lessons which the Yogi gives us is in the mind, 
the power of concentration and meditation.... We have become so materialistic. 
When we think of ourselves, we find only the body. The body has become the 
ideal, nothing else. Therefore a little physical help is necessary.... 

First, to sit in the posture In which you can sit still for a long time. All the 
nerve currents which are working pass along the spine. The spine is not 
intended to support the weight of the body. Therefore the posture must be such 
that the weight of the body is not on the spine. Let it be free from all pressure. 

There are some other preliminary things. There is the great question of food 
and exercise.... 


The food must be simple and taken several times [a day] instead of once or 
twice. Never get very hungry. "He who eats too much cannot be a Yogi. He 
who fasts too much cannot be a Yogi. He who sleeps too much cannot be a 
Yogi, nor he who keeps awake too much." (Gita, VI. 16.) He who does not do 
any work and he who works too hard cannot succeed. Proper food, proper 
exercise, proper sleep, proper wakefulness — these are necessary for any 
success. 

What the proper food is, what kind, we have to determine ourselves. Nobody 
can determine that [for us]. As a general practice, we have to shun exciting 
food.... We do not know how to vary our diet with our occupation. We always 
forget that it is the food out of which we manufacture everything we have. So 
the amount and kind of energy that we want, the food must determine.... 

Violent exercises are not all necessary.... If you want to be muscular. Yoga is 
not for you. You have to manufacture a finer organism than you have now. 
Violent exercises are positively hurtful.... Live amongst those who do not take 
too much exercise. If you do not take violent exercise, you will live longer. 

You do not want to burn out your lamp in muscles! People who work with their 
brains are the longest-lived people.... Do not burn the lamp quickly. Let it bum 
slowly and gently.... Every anxiety, every violent exercise physical and mental 
— [means] you are burning the lamp. 

The proper diet means, generally, simply do not eat highly spiced foods. There 
are three sorts of mind, says the Yogi, according to the elements of nature. One 
is the dull mind, which covers the luminosity of the soul. Then there is that 
which makes people active, and lastly, that which makes them calm and 
peaceful. 

Now there are persons born with the tendency to sleep all the time. Their taste 
will be towards that type of food which is rotting — crawling cheese. They will 
eat cheese that fairly jumps off the table. It is a natural tendency with them. 

Then active people. Their taste is for everything hot and pungent, strong 
alcohol.... 




Sattvika people are very thoughtful, quiet, and patient. They take food in small 
quantities, and never anything bad. 

I am always asked the question: "Shall I give up meat?" My Master said, "Why 
should you give up anything? It will give you up." Do not give up anything in 
nature. Make it so hot for nature that she will give you up. There will come a 
time when you cannot possibly eat meat. The very sight of it will disgust you. 
There will come a time when many things you are struggling to give up will be 
distasteful, positively loathsome. 

Then there are various sorts of breathing exercises. One consists of three parts: 
the drawing in of the breath, the holding of the breath — stopping still without 
breathing — and throwing the breath out. [Some breathing exercises] are rather 
difficult, and some of the complicated ones are attended with great danger if 
done without proper diet. I would not advise you to go through any one of these 
except the very simple ones. 

Take a deep breath and fill the lungs. Slowly throw the breath out. Take it 
through one nostril and fill the lungs, and throw it out slowly through the other 
nostril. Some of us do not breathe deeply enough. Others cannot fill the lungs 
enough. These breathings will correct that very much. Half an hour in the 
morning and half an hour in the evening will make you another person. This 
sort of breathing is never dangerous. The other exercises should be practiced 
very slowly. And measure your strength. If ten minutes are a drain, only take 
five. 

The Yogi is expected to keep his own body well. These various breathing 
exercises are a great help in regulating the different parts of the body. All the 
different parts are inundated with breath. It is through breath that we gain 
control of them all. Disharmony in parts of the body is controlled by more flow 
of the nerve currents towards them. The Yogi ought to be able to tell when in 
any part pain is caused by less vitality or more. He has to equalise that.... 

Another condition [for success in Yoga] is chastity. It is the corner-stone of all 
practice. Married or unmarried — perfect chastity. It is a long subject, of 
course, but I want to tell you: Public discussions of this subject are not to the 





taste of this country. These Western countries are full of the most degraded 
beings in the shape of teachers who teach men and women that if they are 
chaste they will be hurt. How do they gather all this? ... People come to me — 
thousands come every year — with this one question. Someone has told them 
that if they are chaste and pure they will be hurt physically.... How do these 
teachers know it? Have they been chaste? Those unchaste, impure fools, lustful 
creatures, want to drag the whole world down to their [level]! ... 

Nothing is gained except by sacrifice.... The holiest function of our human 
consciousness, the noblest, do not make it unclean! Do not degrade it to the 
level of the brutes.... Make yourselves decent men! ... Be chaste and pure! ... 
There is no other way. Did Christ find any other way? ... If you can conserve 
and use the energy properly, it leads you to God. Inverted, it is hell itself.... 

It is much easier to do anything upon the external plane, but the greatest 
conqueror in the world finds himself a mere child when he tries to control his 
own mind. This is the world he has to conquer — the greater and more difficult 
world to conquer. Do not despair! Awake, arise, and stop not until the goal is 
reached!... 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / 


THE POWERS OF THE MIND 

{Delivered at Los Angeles, California, January 8, 1900) 

All over the world there has been the belief in the supernatural throughout the 
ages. All of us have heard of extraordinary happenings, and many of us have 
had some personal experience of them. I would rather introduce the subject by 
telling you certain facts which have come within my own experience. I once 
heard of a man who, if any one went to him with questions in his mind, would 
answer them immediately; and I was also informed that he foretold events. I 
was curious and went to see him with a few friends. We each had something in 
our minds to ask, and, to avoid mistakes, we wrote down our questions and put 
them in our pockets. As soon as the man saw one of us, he repeated our 
questions and gave the answers to them. Then he wrote something on paper, 
which he folded up, asked me to sign on the back, and said, "Don't look at it; 
put it in your pocket and keep it there till I ask for it again." And so on to each 
one of us. He next told us about some events that would happen to us in the 
future. Then he said, "Now, think of a word or a sentence, from any language 
you like." I thought of a long sentence from Sanskrit, a language of which he 
was entirely ignorant. "Now, take out the paper from your pocket," he said. The 
Sanskrit sentence was written there! He had written it an hour before with the 
remark, "In confirmation of what I have written, this man will think of this 
sentence." It was correct. Another of us who had been given a similar paper 
which he had signed and placed in his pocket, was also asked to think of a 
sentence. He thought of a sentence in Arabic, which it was still less possible for 
the man to know; it was some passage from the Koran. And my friend found 
this written down on the paper. 

Another of us was a physician. He thought of a sentence from a German 
medical book. It was written on his paper. 

Several days later I went to this man again, thinking possibly I had been 
deluded somehow before. I took other friends, and on this occasion also he 
came out wonderfully triumphant. 





Another time I was in the city of Hyderabad in India, and I was told of a 
Brahmin there who could produce numbers of things from where, nobody 
knew. This man was in business there; he was a respectable gentleman. And I 
asked him to show me his tricks. It so happened that this man had a fever, and 
in India there is a general belief that if a holy man puts his hand on a sick man 
he would be well. This Brahmin came to me and said, "Sir, put your hand on 
my head, so that my fever may be cured." I said, "Very good; but you show me 
your tricks." He promised. I put my hand on his head as desired, and later he 
came to fulfil his promise. He had only a strip of cloth about his loins, we took 
off everything else from him. I had a blanket which I gave him to wrap round 
himself, because it was cold, and made him sit in a corner. Twenty-five pairs of 
eyes were looking at him. And he said, "Now, look, write down anything you 
want." We all wrote down names of fruits that never grew in that country, 
bunches of grapes, oranges, and so on. And we gave him those bits of paper. 
And there came from under his blanket, bushels of grapes, oranges, and so 
forth, so much that if all that fruit was weighed, it would have been twice as 
heavy as the man. He asked us to eat the fruit. Some of us objected, thinking it 
was hypnotism; but the man began eating himself — so we all ate. It was all 
right. 

He ended by producing a mass of roses. Each flower was perfect, with dew- 
drops on the petals, not one crushed, not one injured. And masses of them! 
When I asked the man for an explanation, he said, "It is all sleight of hand." 

Whatever it was, it seemed to be impossible that it could be sleight of hand 
merely. From whence could he have got such large quantities of things? 

Well, I saw many things like that. Going about India you find hundreds of 
similar things in different places. These are in every country. Even in this 
country you will find some such wonderful things. Of course there is a great 
deal of fraud, no doubt; but then, whenever you see fraud, you have also to say 
that fraud is an imitation. There must be some truth somewhere, that is being 
imitated; you cannot imitate nothing. Imitation must be of something 
substantially true. 

In very remote times in India, thousands of years ago, these facts used to 


happen even more than they do today. It seems to me that when a country 
becomes very thickly populated, psychical power deteriorates. Given a vast 
country thinly inhabited, there will, perhaps, be more of psychical power there. 
These facts, the Hindus, being analytically minded, took up and investigated. 
And they came to certain remarkable conclusions; that is, they made a science 
of it. They found out that all these, though extraordinary, are also natural; there 
is nothing supernatural. They are under laws just the same as any other physical 
phenomenon. It is not a freak of nature that a man is born with such powers. 
They can be systematically studied, practiced, and acquired. This science they 
call the science of Raja-Yoga. There are thousands of people who cultivate the 
study of this science, and for the whole nation it has become a part of daily 
worship. 

The conclusion they have reached is that all these extraordinary powers are in 
the mind of man. This mind is a part of the universal mind. Each mind is 
connected with every other mind. And each mind, wherever it is located, is in 
actual communication with the whole world. 

Have you ever noticed the phenomenon that is called thought-transference? A 
man here is thinking something, and that thought is manifested in somebody 
else, in some other place. With preparations — not by chance — a man wants 
to send a thought to another mind at a distance, and this other mind knows that 
a thought is coming, and he receives it exactly as it is sent out. Distance makes 
no difference. The thought goes and reaches the other man, and he understands 
it. If your mind were an isolated something here, and my mind were an isolated 
something there, and there were no connection between the two, how would it 
be possible for my thought to reach you? In the ordinary cases, it is not my 
thought that is reaching you direct; but my thought has got to be dissolved into 
ethereal vibrations and those ethereal vibrations go into your brain, and they 
have to be resolved again into your own thoughts. Here is a dissolution of 
thought, and there is a resolution of thought. It is a roundabout process. But in 
telepathy, there is no such thing; it is direct. 

This shows that there is a continuity of mind, as the Yogis call it. The mind is 
universal. Your mind, my mind, all these little minds, are fragments of that 
universal mind, little waves in the ocean; and on account of this continuity, we 



can convey our thoughts directly to one another. 

You see what is happening all around us. The world is one of influence. Part of 
our energy is used up in the preservation of our own bodies. Beyond that, every 
particle of our energy is day and night being used in influencing others. Our 
bodies, our virtues, our intellect, and our spirituality, all these are continuously 
influencing others; and so, conversely, we are being influenced by them. This 
is going on all around us. Now, to take a concrete example. A man comes; you 
know he is very learned, his language is beautiful, and he speaks to you by the 
hour; but he does not make any impression. Another man comes, and he speaks 
a few words, not well arranged, ungrammatical perhaps; all the same, he makes 
an immense impression. Many of you have seen that. So it is evident that words 
alone cannot always produce an impression. Words, even thoughts contribute 
only one-third of the influence in making an impression, the man, two-thirds. 
What you call the personal magnetism of the man — that is what goes out and 
impresses you. 

In our families there are the heads; some of them are successful, others are not. 
Why? We complain of others in our failures. The moment I am unsuccessful, I 
say, so-and-so is the cause of the failure. In failure, one does not like to confess 
one's own faults and weaknesses. Each person tries to hold himself faultless 
and lay the blame upon somebody or something else, or even on bad luck. 
When heads of families fail, they should ask themselves, why it is that some 
persons manage a family so well and others do not. Then you will find that the 
difference is owing to the man — his presence, his personality. 

Coming to great leaders of mankind, we always find that it was the personality 
of the man that counted. Now, take all the great authors of the past, the great 
thinkers. Really speaking, how many thoughts have they thought? Take all the 
writings that have been left to us by the past leaders of mankind; take each one 
of their books and appraise them. The real thoughts, new and genuine, that 
have been thought in this world up to this time, amount to only a handful. Read 
in their books the thoughts they have left to us. The authors do not appear to be 
giants to us, and yet we know that they were great giants in their days. What 
made them so? Not simply the thoughts they thought, neither the books they 
wrote, nor the speeches they made, it was something else that is now gone, that 




is their personality. As I have already remarked, the personality of the man is 
two-thirds, and his intellect, his words, are but one-third. It is the real man, the 
personality of the man, that runs through us. Our actions are but effects. 

Actions must come when the man is there; the effect is bound to follow the 
cause. 

The ideal of all education, all training, should be this man-making. But, instead 
of that, we are always trying to polish up the outside. What use in polishing up 
the outside when there is no inside? The end and aim of all training is to make 
the man grow. The man who influences, who throws his magic, as it were, 
upon his fellow-beings, is a dynamo of power, and when that man is ready, he 
can do anything and everything he likes; that personality put upon anything 
will make it work. 

Now, we see that though this is a fact, no physical laws that we know of will 
explain this. How can we explain it by chemical and physical knowledge? How 
much of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon, how many molecules in different positions, 
and how many cells, etc., etc. can explain this mysterious personality? And we 
still see, it is a fact, and not only that, it is the real man; and it is that man that 
lives and moves and works, it is that man that influences, moves his fellow- 
beings, and passes out, and his intellect and books and works are but traces left 
behind. Think of this. Compare the great teachers of religion with the great 
philosophers. The philosophers scarcely influenced anybody's inner man, and 
yet they wrote most marvellous books. The religious teachers, on the other 
hand, moved countries in their lifetime. The difference was made by 
personality. In the philosopher it is a faint personality that influences; in the 
great prophets it is tremendous. In the former we touch the intellect, in the 
latter we touch life. In the one case, it is simply a chemical process, putting 
certain chemical ingredients together which may gradually combine and under 
proper circumstances bring out a flash of light or may fail. In the other, it is like 
a torch that goes round quickly, lighting others. 

The science of Yoga claims that it has discovered the laws which develop this 
personality, and by proper attention to those laws and methods, each one can 
grow and strengthen his personality. This is one of the great practical things, 
and this is the secret of all education. This has a universal application. In the 


life of the householder, in the life of the poor, the rich, the man of business, the 
spiritual man, in every one's life, it is a great thing, the strengthening of this 
personality. There are laws, very fine, which are behind the physical laws, as 
we know. That is to say, there are no such realities as a physical world, a 
mental world, a spiritual world. Whatever is, is one. Let us say, it is a sort of 
tapering existence; the thickest part is here, it tapers and becomes finer and 
finer. The finest is what we call spirit; the grossest, the body. And just as it is 
here in microcosm, it is exactly the same in the macrocosm. The universe of 
ours is exactly like that; it is the gross external thickness, and it tapers into 
something finer and finer until it becomes God. 

We also know that the greatest power is lodged in the fine, not in the coarse. 
We see a man take up a huge weight, we see his muscles swell, and all over his 
body we see signs of exertion, and we think the muscles are powerful things. 
But it is the thin thread-like things, the nerves, which bring power to the 
muscles; the moment one of these threads is cut off from reaching the muscles, 
they are not able to work at all. These tiny nerves bring the power from 
something still finer, and that again in its turn brings it from something finer 
still — thought, and so on. So, it is the fine that is really the seat of power. Of 
course we can see the movements in the gross; but when fine movements take 
place, we cannot see them. When a gross thing moves, we catch it, and thus we 
naturally identify movement with things which are gross. But all the power is 
really in the fine. We do not see any movement in the fine, perhaps, because 
the movement is so intense that we cannot perceive it. But if by any science, 
any investigation, we are helped to get hold of these finer forces which are the 
cause of the expression, the expression itself will be under control. There is a 
little bubble coming from the bottom of a lake; we do not see it coming all the 
time, we see it only when it bursts on the surface; so, we can perceive thoughts 
only after they develop a great deal, or after they become actions. We 
constantly complain that we have no control over our actions, over our 
thoughts. But how can we have it? If we can get control over the fine 
movements, if we can get hold of thought at the root, before it has become 
thought, before it has become action, then it would be possible for us to control 
the whole. Now, if there is a method by which we can analyse, investigate, 
understand, and finally grapple with those finer powers, the finer causes, then 
alone is it possible to have control over ourselves, and the man who has control 


over his own mind assuredly will have control over every other mind. That is 
why purity and morality have been always the object of religion; a pure, moral 
man has control of himself. And all minds are the same, different parts of one 
Mind. He who knows one lump of clay has known all the clay in the universe. 
He who knows and controls his own mind knows the secret of every mind and 
has power over every mind 

Now, a good deal of our physical evil we can get rid of, if we have control over 
the fine parts; a good many worries we can throw off, if we have control over 
the fine movements; a good many failures can be averted, if we have control 
over these fine powers. So far, is utility. Yet beyond, there is something higher. 

Now, I shall tell you a theory, which I will not argue now, but simply place 
before you the conclusion. Each man in his childhood runs through the stages 
through which his race has come up; only the race took thousands of years to 
do it, while the child takes a few years. The child is first the old savage man — 
and he crushes a butterfly under his feet. The child is at first like the primitive 
ancestors of his race. As he grows, he passes through different stages until he 
reaches the development of his race. Only he does it swiftly and quickly. Now, 
take the whole of humanity as a race, or take the whole of the animal creation, 
man and the lower animals, as one whole. There is an end towards which the 
whole is moving. Let us call it perfection. Some men and women are born who 
anticipate the whole progress of mankind. Instead of waiting and being reborn 
over and over again for ages until the whole human race has attained to that 
perfection, they, as it were, rush through them in a few short years of their life. 
And we know that we can hasten these processes, if we be true to ourselves. If 
a number of men, without any culture, be left to live upon an island, and are 
given barely enough food, clothing, and shelter, they will gradually go on and 
on, evolving higher and higher stages of civilization. We know also, that this 
growth can be hastened by additional means. We help the growth of trees, do 
we not? Left to nature they would have grown, only they would have taken a 
longer time; we help them to grow in a shorter time than they would otherwise 
have taken. We are doing all the time the same thing, hastening the growth of 
things by artificial means. Why cannot we hasten the growth of man? We can 
do that as a race Why are teachers sent to other countries? Because by these 
means we can hasten the growth of races. Now, can we not hasten the growth 



of individuals? We can. Can we put a limit to the hastening? We cannot say 
how much a man can grow in one life. You have no reason to say that this 
much a man can do and no more. Circumstances can hasten him wonderfully. 
Can there be any limit then, till you come to perfection? So, what comes of it? 
— That a perfect man, that is to say, the type that is to come of this race, 
perhaps millions of years hence, that man can come today. And this is what the 
Yogis say, that all great incarnations and prophets are such men; that they 
reached perfection in this one life. We have had such men at all periods of the 
world's history and at all times. Quite recently, there was such a man who lived 
the life of the whole human race and reached the end — even in this life. Even 
this hastening of the growth must be under laws. Suppose we can investigate 
these laws and understand their secrets and apply them to our own needs; it 
follows that we grow. We hasten our growth, we hasten our development, and 
we become perfect, even in this life. This is the higher part of our life, and the 
science of the study of mind and its powers has this perfection as its real end. 
Helping others with money and other material things and teaching them how to 
go on smoothly in their daily life are mere details. 

The utility of this science is to bring out the perfect man, and not let him wait 
and wait for ages, just a plaything in the hands of the physical world, like a log 
of drift-wood carried from wave to wave and tossing about in the ocean. This 
science wants you to be strong, to take the work in your own hand, instead of 
leaving it in the hands of nature, and get beyond this little life. That is the great 
idea. 

Man is growing in knowledge, in power, in happiness. Continuously, we are 
growing as a race. We see that is true, perfectly true. Is it true of individuals? 

To a certain extent, yes. But yet, again comes the question: Where do you fix 
the limit? I can see only at a distance of so many feet. But I have seen a man 
close his eyes and see what is happening in another room. If you say you do not 
believe it, perhaps in three weeks that man can make you do the same. It can be 
taught to anybody. Some persons, in five minutes even, can be made to read 
what is happening in another man's mind. These facts can be demonstrated. 

Now, if these things are true, where can we put a limit? If a man can read what 
is happening in another's mind in the corner of this room, why not in the next 




room? Why not anywhere? We cannot say, why not. We dare not say that it is 
not possible. We can only say, we do not know how it happens. Material 
scientists have no right to say that things like this are not possible; they can 
only say, "We do not know." Science has to collect facts, generalise upon them, 
deduce principles, and state the truth — that is all. But if we begin by denying 
the facts, how can a science be? 

There is no end to the power a man can obtain. This is the peculiarity of the 
Indian mind, that when anything interests it, it gets absorbed in it and other 
things are neglected. You know how many sciences had their origin in India. 
Mathematics began there. You are even today counting 1, 2, 3, etc. to zero, 
after Sanskrit figures, and you all know that algebra also originated in India, 
and that gravitation was known to the Indians thousands of years before 
Newton was born. 

You see the peculiarity. At a certain period of Indian history, this one subject of 
man and his mind absorbed all their interest. And it was so enticing, because it 
seemed the easiest way to achieve their ends. Now, the Indian mind became so 
thoroughly persuaded that the mind could do anything and everything 
according to law, that its powers became the great object of study. Charms, 
magic, and other powers, and all that were nothing extraordinary, but a 
regularly taught science, just as the physical sciences they had taught before 
that. Such a conviction in these things came upon the race that physical 
sciences nearly died out. It was the one thing that came before them. Different 
sects of Yogis began to make all sorts of experiments. Some made experiments 
with light, trying to find out how lights of different colours produced changes 
in the body. They wore a certain coloured cloth, lived under a certain colour, 
and ate certain coloured foods. All sorts of experiments were made in this way. 
Others made experiments in sound by stopping and unstopping their ears. And 
still others experimented in the sense of smell, and so on. 

The whole idea was to get at the basis, to reach the fine parts of the thing. And 
some of them really showed most marvellous powers. Many of them were 
trying to float in the air or pass through it. I shall tell you a story which I heard 
from a great scholar in the West. It was told him by a Governor of Ceylon who 
saw the performance. A girl was brought forward and seated cross-legged upon 



a stool made of sticks crossed. After she had been seated for a time, the show¬ 
man began to take out, one after another, these cross-bars; and when all were 
taken out, the girl was left floating in the air. The Governor thought there was 
some trick, so he drew his sword and violently passed it under the girl; nothing 
was there. Now, what was this? It was not magic or something extraordinary. 
That is the peculiarity. No one in India would tell you that things like this do 
not exist. To the Hindu it is a matter of course. You know what the Hindus 
would often say when they have to fight their enemies — "Oh, one of our 
Yogis will come and drive the whole lot out!" It is the extreme belief of the 
race. What power is there in the hand or the sword? The power is all in the 
spirit. 

If this is true, it is temptation enough for the mind to exert its highest. But as 
with every other science it is very difficult to make any great achievement, so 
also with this, nay much more. Yet most people think that these powers can be 
easily gained. How many are the years you take to make a fortune? Think of 
that! First, how many years do you take to learn electrical science or 
engineering? And then you have to work all the rest of your life. 

Again, most of the other sciences deal with things that do not move, that are 
fixed. You can analyse the chair, the chair does not fly from you. But this 
science deals with the mind, which moves all the time; the moment you want to 
study it, it slips. Now the mind is in one mood, the next moment, perhaps, it is 
different, changing, changing all the time. In the midst of all this change it has 
to be studied, understood, grasped, and controlled. How much more difficult, 
then, is this science! It requires rigorous training. People ask me why I do not 
give them practical lessons. Why, it is no joke. I stand upon this platform 
talking to you and you go home and find no benefit; nor do I. Then you say, "It 
is all bosh." It is because you wanted to make a bosh of it. I know very little of 
this science, but the little that I gained I worked for thirty years of my life, and 
for six years I have been telling people the little that I know. It took me thirty 
years to learn it; thirty years of hard struggle. Sometimes I worked at it twenty 
hours during the twenty-four; sometimes I slept only one hour in the night; 
sometimes I worked whole nights; sometimes I lived in places where there was 
hardly a sound, hardly a breath; sometimes I had to live in caves. Think of that. 
And yet I know little or nothing; I have barely touched the hem of the garment 


of this science. But I can understand that it is true and vast and wonderful. 

Now, if there is any one amongst you who really wants to study this science, he 
will have to start with that sort of determination, the same as, nay even more 
than, that which he puts into any business of life. 

And what an amount of attention does business require, and what a rigorous 
taskmaster it is! Even if the father, the mother, the wife, or the child dies, 
business cannot stop! Even if the heart is breaking, we still have to go to our 
place of business, when every hour of work is a pang. That is business, and we 
think that it is just, that it is right. 

This science calls for more application than any business can ever require. 
Many men can succeed in business; very few in this. Because so much depends 
upon the particular constitution of the person studying it. As in business all 
may not make a fortune, but everyone can make something, so in the study of 
this science each one can get a glimpse which will convince him of its truth and 
of the fact that there have been men who realised it fully. 

This is the outline of the science. It stands upon its own feet and in its own 
light, and challenges comparison with any other science. There have been 
charlatans, there have been magicians, there have been cheats, and more here 
than in any other field. Why? Eor the same reason, that the more profitable the 
business, the greater the number of charlatans and cheats. But that is no reason 
why the business should not be good. And one thing more; it may be good 
intellectual gymnastics to listen to all the arguments and an intellectual 
satisfaction to hear of wonderful things. But, if any one of you really wants to 
learn something beyond that, merely attending lectures will not do. That cannot 
be taught in lectures, for it is life; and life can only convey life. If there are any 
amongst you who are really determined to learn it, I shall be very glad to help 
them. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / 


HINTS ON PRACTICAL SPIRITUALITY 

{Delivered at the Home of Truth, Los Angeles, California) 

This morning I shall try to present to you some ideas about breathing and other 
exercises. We have been discussing theories so long that now it will be well to 
have a little of the practical. A great many books have been written in India 
upon this subject. Just as your people are practical in many things, so it seems 
our people are practical in this line. Five persons in this country will join their 
heads together and say, "We will have a joint-stock company", and in five 
hours it is done; in India they could not do it in fifty years; they are so 
unpractical in matters like this. But, mark you, if a man starts a system of 
philosophy, however wild its theory may be, it will have followers. For 
instance, a sect is started to teach that if a man stands on one leg for twelve 
years, day and night, he will get salvation — there will be hundreds ready to 
stand on one leg. All the suffering will be quietly borne. There are people who 
keep their arms upraised for years to gain religious merit. I have seen hundreds 
of them. And, mind you, they are not always ignorant fools, but are men who 
will astonish you with the depth and breadth of their intellect. So, you see, the 
word practical is also relative. 

We are always making this mistake in judging others; we are always inclined to 
think that our little mental universe is all that is; our ethics, our morality, our 
sense of duty, our sense of utility, are the only things that are worth having. 

The other day when I was going to Europe, I was passing through Marseilles, 
where a bull-fight was being held. All the Englishmen in the steamer were mad 
with excitement, abusing and criticising the whole thing as cruel. When I 
reached England, I heard of a party of prize-fighters who had been to Paris, and 
were kicked out unceremoniously by the Erench, who thought prize-fighting 
very brutal. When I hear these things in various countries, I begin to understand 
the marvellous saying of Christ: "Judge not that ye be not judged." The more 
we learn, the more he find out how ignorant we are, how multiform and multi¬ 
sided is this mind of man. When I was a boy, I used to criticise the ascetic 
practices of my countrymen; great preachers in our own land have criticised 
them; the greatest man that was ever bom, Buddha himself, criticised them. But 





all the same, as I am growing older, I feel that I have no right to judge. 
Sometimes I wish that, in spite of all their incongruities, I had one fragment of 
their power to do and suffer. Often I think that my Judgment and my criticism 
do not proceed from any dislike of torture, but from sheer cowardice — 
because I cannot do it — I dare not do it. 

Then, you see that strength, power, and courage are things which are very 
peculiar. We generally say, "A courageous man, a brave man, a daring man", 
but we must bear in mind that that courage or bravery or any other trait does 
not always characterise the man. The same man who would rush to the mouth 
of a cannon shrinks from the knife of the surgeon; and another man who never 
dares to face a gun will calmly bear a severe surgical operation, if need be. 
Now, in judging others you must always define your terms of courage or 
greatness. The man whom I am criticising as not good may be wonderfully so 
in some points in which I am not. 

Take another example. You often note, when people are discussing as to what 
man and woman can do, always the same mistake is made. They think they 
show man at his best because he can fight, for instance, and undergo 
tremendous physical exertion; and this is pitted against the physical weakness 
and the non-combating quality of woman. This is unjust. Woman is as 
courageous as man. Each is equally good in his or her way. What man can 
bring up a child with such patience, endurance, and love as the woman can? 

The one has developed the power of doing; the other, the power of suffering. If 
woman cannot act, neither can man suffer. The whole universe is one of perfect 
balance. I do not know, but some day we may wake up and find that the mere 
worm has something which balances our manhood. The most wicked person 
may have some good qualities that I entirely lack. I see that every day of my 
life. Look at the savage! I wish I had such a splendid physique. He eats, he 
drinks, to his heart's content, without knowing perhaps what sickness is, while I 
am suffering every minute. How many times would I have been glad to have 
changed my brain for his body! The whole universe is only a wave and a 
hollow; there can be no wave without a hollow. Balance everywhere. You have 
one thing great, your neighbour has another thing great. When you are judging 
man and woman, judge them by the standard of their respective greatness. One 
cannot be in other's shoes. The one has no right to say that the other is wicked. 


It is the same old superstition that says, "If this is done, the world will go to 
ruin." But in spite of this the world has not yet come to ruin. It was said in this 
country that if the Negroes were freed, the country would go to ruin — but did 
it? It was also said that if the masses were educated, the world would come to 
ruin — but it was only made better. Several years ago a book came out 
depicting the worst thing that could happen to England. The writer showed that 
as workmen's wages were rising, English commerce was declining. A cry was 
raised that the workmen in England were exorbitant in their demands, and that 
the Germans worked for less wages. A commission was sent over to Germany 
to investigate this and it reported that the German labourers received higher 
wages. Why was it so? Because of the education of the masses. Then how 
about the world going to ruin if the masses are educated? In India, especially, 
we meet with old fogies all over the land. They want to keep everything secret 
from the masses. These people come to the very satisfying conclusion that they 
are the creme de la creme of this universe. They believed they cannot be hurt 
by these dangerous experiments. It is only the masses that can be hurt by them! 

Now, coming back to the practical. The subject of the practical application of 
psychology has been taken up in India from very early times. About fourteen 
hundred years before Christ, there flourished in India a great philosopher, 
Patanjali by name. He collected all the facts, evidences, and researches in 
psychology and took advantage of all the experiences accumulated in the past. 
Remember, this world is very old; it was not created only two or three thousand 
years ago. It is taught here in the West that society began eighteen hundred 
years ago, with the New Testament. Before that there was no society. That may 
be true with regard to the West, but it is not true as regards the whole world. 
Often, while I was lecturing in London, a very intellectual and intelligent friend 
of mine would argue with me, and one day after using all his weapons against 
me, he suddenly exclaimed, "But why did not your Rishis come to England to 
teach us?" I replied, "Because there was no England to come to. Would they 
preach to the forests?" 

"Eifty years ago," said Ingersoll to me, "you would have been hanged in this 
country if you had come to preach. You would have been burnt alive or you 
would have been stoned out of the villages." 



So there is nothing unreasonable in the supposition that civilisation existed 
fourteen hundred years before Christ. It is not yet settled whether civilisation 
has always come from the lower to the higher. The same arguments and proofs 
that have been brought forward to prove this proposition can also be used to 
demonstrate that the savage is only a degraded civilised man. The people of 
China, for instance, can never believe that civilisation sprang from a savage 
state, because the contrary is within their experience. But when you talk of the 
civilisation of America, what you mean is the perpetuity and the growth of your 
own race. 

It is very easy to believe that the Hindus, who have been declining for seven 
hundred years, were highly civilised in the past. We cannot prove that it is not 
so. 

There is not one single instance of any civilisation being spontaneous. There 
was not a race in the world which became civilised unless another civilised 
race came and mingled with that race. The origin of civilisation must have 
belonged, so to say, to one or two races who went abroad, spread their ideas, 
and intermingled with other races and thus civilisation spread. 

For practical purposes, let us talk in the language of modern science. But I must 
ask you to bear in mind that, as there is religious superstition, so also there is a 
superstition in the matter of science. There are priests who take up religious 
work as their speciality; so also there are priests of physical law, scientists. As 
soon as a great scientist's name, like Darwin or Huxley, is cited, we follow 
blindly. It is the fashion of the day. Ninety-nine per cent of what we call 
scientific knowledge is mere theories. And many of them are no better than the 
old superstitions of ghosts with many heads and hands, but with this difference 
that the latter differentiated man a little from stocks and stones. True science 
asks us to be cautious. Just as we should be careful with the priests, so we 
should be with the scientists. Begin with disbelief. Analyse, test, prove 
everything, and then take it. Some of the most current beliefs of modern 
science have not been proved. Even in such a science as mathematics, the vast 
majority of its theories are only working hypotheses. With the advent of greater 
knowledge they will be thrown away. 


In 1400 B.C. a great sage made an attempt to arrange, analyse, and generalise 
upon certain psychological facts. He was followed by many others who took up 
parts of what he had discovered and made a special study of them The Hindus 
alone of all ancient races took up the study of this branch of knowledge in right 
earnest. I am teaching you now about it, but how many of you will practice it? 
How many days, how many months will it be before you give it up? You are 
impractical on this subject. In India, they will persevere for ages and ages. You 
will be astonished to hear that they have no churches, no Common Prayers, or 
anything of the kind; but they, every day, still practice the breathings and try to 
concentrate the mind; and that is the chief part of their devotion. These are the 
main points. Every Hindu must do these. It is the religion of the country. Only, 
each one may have a special method — a special form of breathing, a special 
form of concentration, and what is one's special method, even one's wife need 
not know; the father need not know the son's. But they all have to do these. 

And there is nothing occult about these things. The word "occult" has no 
bearing on them. Near the Ganga thousands and thousands of people may be 
seen daily sitting on its banks breathing and concentrating with closed eyes. 
There may be two reasons that make certain practices impracticable for the 
generality of mankind. One is, the teachers hold that the ordinary people are 
not fit for them. There may be some truth in this, but it is due more to pride. 

The second is the fear of persecution. A man, for instance, would not like to 
practice breathing publicly in this country, because he would be thought so 
queer; it is not the fashion here. On the other hand, in India, if a man prayed, 
"Give us this day our daily bread", people would laugh at him. Nothing could 
be more foolish to the Hindu mind than to say, "Our Father which art in 
Heaven." The Hindu, when he worships, thinks that God is within himself. 

According to the Yogis, there are three principal nerve currents: one they call 
the Ida, the other the Pingala, and the middle one the Sushumna, and all these 
are inside the spinal column. The Ida and the Pingala, the left and the right, are 
clusters of nerves, while the middle one, the Sushumna, is hollow and is not a 
cluster of nerves. This Sushumna is closed, and for the ordinary man is of no 
use, for he works through the Ida and the Pingala only. Currents are continually 
going down and coming up through these nerves, carrying orders all over the 
body through other nerves running to the different organs of the body. 



It is the regulation and the bringing into rhythm of the Ida and Pingala that is 
the great object of breathing. But that itself is nothing — it is only so much air 
taken into the lungs; except for purifying the blood, it is of no more use. There 
is nothing occult in the air that we take in with our breath and assimilate to 
purify the blood; the action is merely a motion. This motion can be reduced to 
the unit movement we call Prana; and everywhere, all movements are the 
various manifestations of this Prana. This Prana is electricity, it is magnetism; 
it is thrown out by the brain as thought. Everything is Prana; it is moving the 
sun, the moon, and the stars. 

We say, whatever is in this universe has been projected by the vibration of the 
Prana. The highest result of vibration is thought. If there be any higher, we 
cannot conceive of it. The nerves, Ida and Pingala, work through the Prana. It is 
the Prana that is moving every part of the body, becoming the different forces. 
Give up that old idea that God is something that produces the effect and sits on 
a throne dispensing justice. In working we become exhausted because we use 
up so much Prana. 

The breathing exercises, called Pranayama, bring about regulation of the 
breathing, rhythmic action of the Prana. When the Prana is working 
rhythmically, everything works properly. When the Yogis get control over their 
own bodies, if there is any disease in any part, they know that the Prana is not 
rhythmic there and they direct the Prana to the affected part until the rhythm is 
re-established. 

Just as you can control the Prana in your own body, so, if you are powerful 
enough, you can control, even from here another man's Prana in India. It is all 
one. There is no break; unity is the law. Physically, psychically, mentally, 
morally, metaphysically, it is all one. Life is only a vibration. That which 
vibrates this ocean of ether, vibrates you. Just as in a lake, various strata of ice 
of various degrees of solidity are formed, or as in an ocean of vapour there are 
various degrees of density, so is this universe an ocean of matter. This is an 
ocean of ether in which we find the sun, moon, stars, and ourselves — in 
different states of solidity; but the continuity is not broken; it is the same 
throughout. 



Now, when we study metaphysics, we come to know the world is one, not that 
the spiritual, the material, the mental, and the world of energies are separate. It 
is all one, but seen from different planes of vision. When you think of yourself 
as a body, you forget that you are a mind, and when you think of yourself as a 
mind, you will forget the body. There is only one thing, that you are; you can 
see it either as matter or body — or you can see it as mind or spirit. Birth, life, 
and death are but old superstitions. None was ever born, none will ever die; one 
changes one's position — that is all. I am sorry to see in the West how much 
they make of death; always trying to catch a little life. "Give us life after death! 
Give us life!" They are so happy if anybody tells them that they are going to 
live afterwards! How can I ever doubt such a thing! How can I imagine that I 
am dead! Try to think of yourself as dead, and you will see that you are present 
to see your own dead body. Life is such a wonderful reality that you cannot for 
a moment forget it. You may as well doubt that you exist. This is the first fact 
of consciousness — I am. Who can imagine a state of things which never 
existed? It is the most self-evident of all truths. So, the idea of immortality is 
inherent in man. How can one discuss a subject that is unimaginable? Why 
should we want to discuss the pros and cons of a subject that is self-evident? 

The whole universe, therefore, is a unit, from whatever standpoint you view it. 
Just now, to us, this universe is a unit of Prana and Akasha, force and matter. 
And mind you, like all other basic principles, this is also self-contradictory. For 
what is force? — that which moves matter. And what is matter? — that which 
is moved by force. It is a seesaw! Some of the fundamentals of our reasoning 
are most curious, in spite of our boast of science and knowledge. "It is a 
headache without a head", as the Sanskrit proverb says. This state of things has 
been called Maya. It has neither existence nor non-existence. You cannot call it 
existence, because that only exists which is beyond time and space, which is 
self-existence. Yet this world satisfies to a certain degree our idea of existence. 
Therefore it has an apparent existence. 

But there is the real existence in and through everything; and that reality, as it 
were, is caught in the meshes of time, space, and causation. There is the real 
man, the infinite, the beginningless, the endless, the ever-blessed, the ever-free. 
He has been caught in the meshes of time, space, and causation. So has 
everything in this world. The reality of everything is the same infinite. This is 






not idealism; it is not that the world does not exist. It has a relative existence, 
and fulfils all its requirements But it has no independent existence. It exists 
because of the Absolute Reality beyond time, space, and causation. 

I have made long digressions. Now, let us return to our main subject. 

All the automatic movements and all the conscious movements are the working 
of Prana through the nerves. Now, you see, it will be a very good thing to have 
control over the unconscious actions. 

On some other occasions, I told you the definition of God and man. Man is an 
infinite circle whose circumference is nowhere, but the centre is located in one 
spot; and God is an infinite circle whose circumference is nowhere, but whose 
centre is everywhere. He works through all hands, sees through all eyes, walks 
on all feet, breathes through all bodies, lives in all life, speaks through every 
mouth, and thinks through every brain. Man can become like God and acquire 
control over the whole universe if he multiplies infinitely his centre of self- 
consciousness. Consciousness, therefore, is the chief thing to understand. Let 
us say that here is an infinite line amid darkness. We do not see the line, but on 
it there is one luminous point which moves on. As it moves along the line, it 
lights up its different parts in succession, and all that is left behind becomes 
dark again. Our consciousnes; may well be likened to this luminous point. Its 
past experiences have been replaced by the present, or have become 
subconscious. We are not aware of their presence in us; but there they are, 
unconsciously influencing our body and mind. Every movement that is now 
being made without the help of consciousness was previously conscious. 
Sufficient impetus has been given to it to work of itself. 

The great error in all ethical systems, without exception, has been the failure of 
teaching the means by which man could refrain from doing evil. All the 
systems of ethics teach, "Do not steal!" Very good; but why does a man steal? 
Because all stealing, robbing, and other evil actions, as a rule, have become 
automatic. The systematic robber, thief, liar, unjust man and woman, are all 
these in spite of themselves! It is really a tremendous psychological problem. 
We should look upon man in the most charitable light. It is not so easy to be 
good. What are you but mere machines until you are free? Should you be proud 


because you are good? Certainly not. You are good because you cannot help it. 
Another is bad because he cannot help it. If you were in his position, who 
knows what you would have been? The woman in the street, or the thief in the 
jail, is the Christ that is being sacrificed that you may be a good man. Such is 
the law of balance. All the thieves and the murderers, all the unjust, the 
weakest, the wickedest, the devils, they all are my Christ! I owe a worship to 
the God Christ and to the demon Christ! That is my doctrine, I cannot help it. 
My salutation goes to the feet of the good, the saintly, and to the feet of the 
wicked and the devilish! They are all my teachers, all are my spiritual fathers, 
all are my Saviours. I may curse one and yet benefit by his failings; I may bless 
another and benefit by his good deeds. This is as true as that I stand here. I 
have to sneer at the woman walking in the street, because society wants it! She, 
my Saviour, she, whose street-walking is the cause of the chastity of other 
women! Think of that. Think, men and women, of this question in your mind. It 
is a truth — a bare, bold truth! As I see more of the world, see more of men and 
women, this conviction grows stronger. Whom shall I blame? Whom shall I 
praise? Both sides of the shield must be seen. 

The task before us is vast; and first and foremost, we must seek to control the 
vast mass of sunken thoughts which have become automatic with us. The evil 
deed is, no doubt, on the conscious plane; but the cause which produced the 
evil deed was far beyond in the realms of the unconscious, unseen, and 
therefore more potent. 

Practical psychology directs first of all its energies in controlling the 
unconscious, and we know that we can do it. Why? Because we know the cause 
of the unconscious is the conscious; the unconscious thoughts are the 
submerged millions of our old conscious thoughts, old conscious actions 
become petrified — we do not look at them, do not know them, have forgotten 
them. But mind you, if the power of evil is in the unconscious, so also is the 
power of good. We have many things stored in us as in a pocket. We have 
forgotten them, do not even think of them, and there are many of them, rotting, 
becoming positively dangerous; they come forth, the unconscious causes which 
kill humanity. True psychology would, therefore, try to bring them under the 
control of the conscious. The great task is to revive the whole man, as it were, 
in order to make him the complete master of himself. Even what we call the 




automatic action of the organs within our bodies, such as the liver etc., can be 
made to obey our commands. 

This is the first part of the study, the control of the unconscious. The next is to 
go beyond the conscious. Just as unconscious work is beneath consciousness, 
so there is another work which is above consciousness. When this 
superconscious state is reached, man becomes free and divine; death becomes 
immortality, weakness becomes infinite power, and iron bondage becomes 
liberty. That is the goal, the infinite realm of the superconscious. 

So, therefore, we see now that there must be a twofold work. First, by the 
proper working of the Ida and the Pingala, which are the two existing ordinary 
currents, to control the subconscious action; and secondly, to go beyond even 
consciousness. 

The books say that he alone is the Yogi who, after long practice in self¬ 
concentration, has attained to this truth. The Sushumna now opens and a 
current which never before entered into this new passage will find its way into 
it, and gradually ascend to (what we call in figurative language) the different 
lotus centres, till at last it reaches the brain. Then the Yogi becomes conscious 
of what he really is, God Himself. 

Everyone without exception, everyone of us, can attain to this culmination of 
Yoga. But it is a terrible task. If a person wants to attain to this truth, he will 
have to do something more than to listen to lectures and take a few breathing 
exercises. Everything lies in the preparation. How long does it take to strike a 
light? Only a second; but how long it takes to make the candle! How long does 
it take to eat a dinner? Perhaps half an hour. But hours to prepare the food! We 
want to strike the light in a second, but we forget that the making of the candle 
is the chief thing. 

But though it is so hard to reach the goal, yet even our smallest attempts are not 
in vain. We know that nothing is lost. In the Gita, Arjuna asks Krishna, "Those 
who fail in attaining perfection in Yoga in this life, are they destroyed like the 
clouds of summer?" Krishna replies, "Nothing, my friend, is lost in this world. 
Whatever one does, that remains as one's own, and if the fruition of Yoga does 


not come in this life, one takes it up again in the next birth." Otherwise, how do 
you explain the marvellous childhood of Jesus, Buddha, Shankara? 

Breathing, posturing, etc. are no doubt helps in Yoga; but they are merely 
physical. The great preparations are mental. The first thing necessary is a quiet 
and peaceable life. 

If you want to be a Yogi, you must be free, and place yourself in circumstances 
where you are alone and free from all anxiety. He who desires a comfortable 
and nice life and at the same time wants to realise the Self is like the fool who, 
wanting to cross the river, caught hold of a crocodile, mistaking it for a log of 
wood (Vivekachuddmani, 84.). "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and everything 
shall be added unto you." This is the one great duty, this is renunciation. Live 
for an ideal, and leave no place in the mind for anything else. Let us put forth 
all our energies to acquire that, which never fails — our spiritual perfection. If 
we have true yearning for realisation, we must struggle, and through struggle 
growth will come. We shall make mistakes, but they may be angels unawares. 

The greatest help to spiritual life is meditation (Dhyana). In meditation we 
divest ourselves of all material conditions and feel our divine nature. We do not 
depend upon any external help in meditation. The touch of the soul can paint 
the brightest colour even in the dingiest places; it can cast a fragrance over the 
vilest thing; it can make the wicked divine — and all enmity, all selfishness is 
effaced. The less the thought of the body, the better. For it is the body that 
drags us down. It is attachment, identification, which makes us miserable. That 
is the secret: To think that I am the spirit and not the body, and that the whole 
of this universe with all its relations, with all its good and all its evil, is but as a 
series of paintings — scenes on a canvas — of which I am the witness. 


» 






« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / 


BHAKTI OR DEVOTION 

The idea of a Personal God has obtained in almost every religion, except a very 
few. With the exception of the Buddhist and the Jain, perhaps all the religions 
of the world have the idea of a Personal God, and with it comes the idea of 
devotion and worship. The Buddhists and the Jains, although they have no 
Personal God, worship the founders of their religions in precisely the same way 
as others worship a Personal God. This idea of devotion and worship to some 
higher being who can reflect back the love to man is universal. In various 
religions this love and devotion is manifested in various degrees, at different 
stages. The lowest stage is that of ritualism, when abstract ideas are almost 
impossible, and are dragged down to the lowest plane, and made concrete. 
Forms come into play, and, along with them, various symbols. Throughout the 
history of the world, we find that man is trying to grasp the abstract through 
thought-forms, or symbols. All the external manifestations of religion — bells, 
music, rituals, books, and images — come under that head. Anything that 
appeals to the senses, anything that helps man to form a concrete image of the 
abstract, is taken hold of, and worshipped. 

From time to time, there have been reformers in every religion who have stood 
against all symbols and rituals. But vain has been their opposition, for so long 
as man will remain as he is, the vast majority will always want something 
concrete to hold on to, something around which, as it were, to place their ideas, 
something which will be the centre of all the thought-forms in their minds. The 
great attempts of the Mohammedans and of the Protestants have been directed 
to this one end, of doing away with all rituals, and yet we find that even with 
them, rituals have crept in. They cannot be kept out; after long struggle, the 
masses simply change one symbol for another. The Mohammedan, who thinks 
that every ritual, every form, image, or ceremony, used by a non-Mohammedan 
is sinful, does not think so when he comes to his own shrine, the Caaba. Every 
religious Mohammedan wherever he prays, must imagine that he is standing 
before the Caaba. When he makes a pilgrimage there, he must kiss the black 
stone in the wall of the shrine. All the kisses that have been imprinted on that 
stone, by millions and millions of pilgrims, will stand up as witnesses for the 






benefit of the faithful on the last day of judgment. Then, there is the well of 
Zimzim. Mohammedans believe that whoever draws a little water out of that 
well will have his sins pardoned, and he will, after the day of resurrection, have 
a fresh body, and live for ever. In others, we find that the symbology comes in 
the form of buildings. Protestants hold that churches are more sacred than other 
places. The church, as it is, stands for a symbol. Or there is the Book. The idea 
of the Book to them, is much holier than any other symbol. 

It is vain to preach against the use of symbols, and why should we preach 
against them? There is no reason why man should not use symbols. They have 
them in order to represent the ideas signified behind them. This universe is a 
symbol, in and through which we are trying to grasp the thing signified, which 
is beyond and behind. The spirit is the goal, and not matter. Forms, images, 
bells, candles, books, churches, temples, and all holy symbols are very good, 
very helpful to the growing plant of spirituality, but thus far and no farther. In 
the test majority of cases, we find that the plant does not grow. It is very good 
to he born in a church, hut it is very bad to die in a church. It is very good to be 
born within the limits of certain forms that help the little plant of spirituality, 
but if a man dies within the bounds of these forms, it shows that he has not 
grown, that there has been no development of the soul. 

If, therefore, any one says that symbols, rituals, and forms are to be kept for 
ever, he is wrong; but if he says, that these symbols and rituals are a help to the 
growth of the soul, in its low and undeveloped state, he is right. But, you must 
not mistake this development of the soul as meaning anything intellectual. A 
man can be of gigantic intellect, yet spiritually he. may be a baby. You can 
verify it this moment. All of you have been taught to believe in an Omnipresent 
God. Try to think of it. How few of you can have any idea of what 
omnipresence means! If you struggle hard, you will get something like the idea 
of the ocean, or of the sky, or of a vast stretch of green earth, or of a desert. All 
these are material images, and so long as you cannot conceive of the abstract as 
abstract, of the ideal as the ideal, you will have to resort to these forms, these 
material images. It does not make much difference whether these images are 
inside or outside the mind. We are all born idolaters, and idolatry is good, 
because it is in the nature of man. Who can get beyond it? Only the perfect 
man, the God-man. The rest are all idolaters. So long as we see this universe 


before us, with its forms and shapes, we are all idolaters. This is a gigantic 
symbol we are worshipping. He who says he is the body is a born idolater. We 
are spirit, spirit that has no form or shape, spirit that is infinite, and not matter. 
Therefore, anyone who cannot grasp the abstract, who cannot think of himself 
as he is, except in and through matter, as the body, is an idolater. And yet how 
people fight among themselves, calling one another idolaters! In other words, 
each says, his idol is right, and the others' are wrong. 

Therefore, we should get rid of these childish notions. We should get beyond 
the prattle of men who think that religion is merely a mass of frothy words, that 
it is only a system of doctrines; to whom religion is only a little intellectual 
assent or dissent; to whom religion is believing in certain words which their 
own priests tell them; to whom religion is something which their forefathers 
believed; to whom religion is a certain form of ideas and superstitions to which 
they cling because they are their national superstitions. We should get beyond 
all these and look at humanity as one vast organism, slowly coming towards 
light — a wonderful plant, slowly unfolding itself to that wonderful truth which 
is called God — and the first gyrations, the first motions, towards this are 
always through matter and through ritual. 

In the heart of all these ritualisms, there stands one idea prominent above all 
the rest — the worship of a name. Those of you who have studied the older 
forms of Christianity, those of you who have studied the other religions of the 
world, perhaps have marked that there is this idea with them all, the worship of 
a name. A name is said to be very sacred. In the Bible we read that the holy 
name of God was considered sacred beyond compare, holy beyond everything. 
It was the holiest of all names, and it was thought that this very Word was God. 
This is quite true. What is this universe but name and form? Can you think 
without words? Word and thought are inseparable. Try if any one of you can 
separate them. Whenever you think, you are doing so through word forms. The 
one brings the other; thought brings the word, and the word brings the thought. 
Thus the whole universe is, as it were, the external symbol of God, and behind 
that stands His grand name. Each particular body is a form, and behind that 
particular body is its name. As soon as you think of our friend So-and-so, there 
comes the idea of his body, and as soon as you think of your friend's body, you 
get the idea of his name. This is in the constitution of man. That is to say. 




psychologically, in the mind-stuff of man, there cannot come the idea of name 
without the idea of form, and there cannot come the idea of form without the 
idea of name. They are inseparable; they are the external and the internal sides 
of the same wave. As such, names have been exalted and worshipped all over 
the world — consciously or unconsciously, man found the glory of names. 

Again, we find that in many different religions, holy personages have been 
worshipped. They worship Krishna, they worship Buddha, they worship Jesus, 
and so forth. Then, there is the worship of saints; hundreds of them have been 
worshipped all over the world, and why not? The vibration of light is 
everywhere. The owl sees it in the dark. That shows it is there, though man 
cannot see it. To man, that vibration is only visible in the lamp, in the sun, in 
the moon, etc. God is omnipresent. He is manifesting Himself in every being; 
but for men. He is only visible, recognisable, in man. When His light. His 
presence. His spirit, shines through the human face, then and then alone, can 
man understand Him. Thus, man has been worshipping God through men all 
the time, and must do so as long as he is a man. He may cry against it, struggle 
against it, but as soon as he attempts to realise God, he will find the 
constitutional necessity of thinking of God as a man. 

So we find that in almost every religion these are the three primary things 
which we have in the worship of God — forms or symbols, names. God-men. 
All religions have these, but you find that they want to fight with each other. 
One says, "My name is the only name; my form is the only form; and my God- 
men are the only God-men in the world; yours are simply myths." In modern 
times, Christian clergymen have become a little kinder, and they allow that in 
the older religions, the different forms of worship were foreshadowings of 
Christianity, which of course, they consider, is the only true form. God tested 
Himself in older times, tested His powers by getting these things into shape 
which culminated in Christianity. This, at least, is a great advance. Fifty years 
ago they would not have said even that; nothing was true except their own 
religion. This idea is not limited to any religion, nation, or class of persons; 
people are always thinking that the only right thing to be done by others is what 
they themselves are doing. And it is here that the study of different religions 
helps us. It shows us that the same thoughts that we have been calling ours, and 
ours alone, were present hundreds of years ago in others, and sometimes even 



in a better form of expression than our own. 


These are the external forms of devotion, through which man has to pass; but if 
he is sincere, if he really wants to reach the truth, he goes higher than these, to 
a plane where forms are as nothing. Temples or churches, books or forms, are 
simply the kindergarten of religion, to make the spiritual child strong enough to 
take higher steps; and these first steps are necessary if he wants religion. With 
the thirst, the longing for God, comes real devotion, real Bhakti. Who has the 
longing? That is the question. Religion is not in doctrines, in dogmas, nor in 
intellectual argumentation; it is being and becoming, it is realisation. We hear 
so many talking about God and the soul, and all the mysteries of the universe, 
but if you take them one by one, and ask them, "Have you realised God? Have 
you seen your Soul?" — how many can say they have? And yet they are all 
fighting with one another! At one time, in India, representatives of different 
sects met together and began to dispute. One said that the only God was Shiva; 
another said, the only God was Vishnu, and so on; and there was no end to their 
discussion. A sage was passing that way, and was invited by the disputants to 
decide the matter. He first asked the man who was claiming Shiva as the 
greatest God, "Have you seen Shiva? Are you acquainted with Him? If not, 
how do you know He is the greatest God?" Then turning to the worshipper of 
Vishnu, he asked, "Have you seen Vishnu?" And after asking this question to 
all of them, he found out that not one of them knew anything of God. That was 
why they were disputing so much, for had they really known, they would not 
have argued. When a jar is being filled with water, it makes a noise, but when it 
is full, there is no noise. So, the very fact of these disputations and fighting 
among sects shows that they do not know anything about religion. Religion to 
them is a mere mass of frothy words, to be written in books. Each one hurries 
to write a big book, to make it as massive as possible, stealing his materials 
from every book he can lay his hands upon, and never acknowledging his 
indebtedness. Then he launches this book upon the world, adding to the 
disturbance that is already existing there. 

The vast majority of men are atheists. I am glad that, in modern times, another 
class of atheists has come into existence in the Western world — I mean the 
materialists. They are sincere atheists. They are better than the religious 


atheists, who are insincere, who fight and talk about religion, and yet do not 
want it, never try to realise it, never try to understand it. Remember the words 
of Christ: "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it 
shall be opened unto you." These words are literally true, not figures or fiction. 
They were the outflow of the heart's blood of one of the greatest sons of God 
who have ever come to this world of ours; words which came as the fruit of 
realisation, from a man who had felt and realised God himself; who had spoken 
with God, lived with God, a hundred times more intensely than you or I see this 
building. Who wants God? That is the question. Do you think that all this mass 
of people in the world want God, and cannot get Him? That cannot be. What 
want is there without its object outside? Man wants to breathe, and there is air 
for him to breathe. Man wants to eat, and there is food to eat. What creates 
these desires? The existence of external things. It was the light that made the 
eyes; it was the sound that made the ears. So every desire in human beings has 
been created by something which already existed outside. This desire for 
perfection, for reaching the goal and getting beyond nature, how can it be there, 
until something has created it and drilled it into the soul of man, and makes it 
live there? He, therefore, in whom this desire is awakened, will reach the goal. 
We want everything but God. This is not religion that you see all around you. 
My lady has furniture in her parlour, from all over the world, and now it is the 
fashion to have something Japanese; so she buys a vase and puts it in her room. 
Such is religion with the vast majority; they have all sorts of things for 
enjoyment, and unless they add a little flavour of religion, life is not all right, 
because society would criticise them. Society expects it; so they must have 
some religion. This is the present state of religion in the world. 

A disciple went to his master and said to him, "Sir, I want religion." The master 
looked at the young man, and did not speak, but only smiled. The young man 
came every day, and insisted that he wanted religion. But the old man knew 
better than the young man. One day, when it was very hot, he asked the young 
man to go to the river with him and take a plunge. The young man plunged in, 
and the old man followed him and held the young man down under the water 
by force. After the young man had struggled for a while, he let him go and 
asked him what he wanted most while he was under the water. "A breath of 
air", the disciple answered. "Do you want God in that way? If you do, you will 
get Him in a moment," said the master. Until you have that thirst, that desire. 


you cannot get religion, however you may struggle with your intellect, or your 
books, or your forms. Until that thirst is awakened in you, you are no better 
than any atheist; only the atheist is sincere, and you are not. 

A great sage used to say, "Suppose there is a thief in a room, and somehow he 
comes to know that there is a vast mass of gold in the next room, and that there 
is only a thin partition between the two rooms What would be the condition of 
that thief? He would be sleepless, he would not be able to eat or do anything. 
His whole mind would be on getting that gold. Do you mean to say that, if all 
these people really believed that the Mine of Happiness, of Blessedness, of 
Glory were here, they would act as they do in the world, without trying to get 
God?" As soon as a man begins to believe there is a God, he becomes mad with 
longing to get to Him. Others may go their way, but as soon as a man is sure 
that there is a much higher life than that which he is leading here, as soon as he 
feels sure that the senses are not all, that this limited, material body is as 
nothing compared with the immortal, eternal, undying bliss of the Self, he 
becomes mad until he finds out this bliss for himself. And this madness, this 
thirst, this mania, is what is called the "awakening" to religion, and when that 
has come, a man is beginning to be religious. But it takes a long time. All these 
forms and ceremonies, these prayers and pilgrimages, these books, bells, 
candles, and priests, are the preparations; they take off the impurities from the 
soul. And when the soul has become pure, it naturally wants to get to the mine 
of all purity, God Himself. Just as a piece of iron, which had been covered with 
the dust of centuries, might be lying near a magnet all the time, and yet not be 
attracted by it, but as soon as the dust is cleared away, the iron is drawn by the 
magnet; so, when the human soul, covered with the dust of ages, impurities, 
wickednesses, and sins, after many births, becomes purified enough by these 
forms and ceremonies, by doing good to others, loving other beings, its natural 
spiritual attraction comes, it wakes up and struggles towards God. 

Yet, all these forms and symbols are simply the beginning, not true love of 
God. Love we hear spoken of everywhere Everyone says, "Love God." Men do 
not know what it into love; if they did, they would not talk so glibly about it. 
Every man says he can love, and then, in no time, finds out that there is no love 
in his nature. Every woman says she can love and soon finds out that she 
cannot. The world is full of the talk of love, but it is hard to love. Where is 


love? How do you know that there is love? The first test of love is that it knows 
no bargaining. So long as you see a man love another only to get something 
from him, you know that that is not love; it is shopkeeping. Wherever there is 
any question of buying and selling, it is not love. So, when a man prays to God, 
"Give me this, and give me that", it is not love. How can it be? I offer you a 
prayer, and you give me something in return; that is what it is, mere 
shopkeeping. 

A certain great king went to hunt in a forest, and there he happened to meet a 
sage. He had a little conversation with him and became so pleased with him 
that he asked him to accept a present from him. "No," said the sage, "I am 
perfectly satisfied with my condition; these trees give me enough fruit to eat; 
these beautiful pure streams supply me with all the water I want; I sleep in 
these caves. What do I care for your presents, though you be an emperor?" The 
emperor said, "Just to purify me, to gratify me, come with me into the city and 
take some present." At last the sage consented to go with the emperor, and he 
was taken into the emperor's palace, where there were gold, jewellery, marble, 
and most wonderful things. Wealth and power were manifest everywhere. The 
emperor asked the sage to wait a minute, while he repeated his prayer, and he 
went into a corner and began to pray, "Lord, give me more wealth, more 
children, more territory." In the meanwhile, the sage got up and began to walk 
away. The emperor saw him going and went after him. "Stay, Sir, you did not 
take my present and are going away." The sage turned to him and said, 

"Beggar, I do not beg of beggars. What can you give? You have been begging 
yourself all the time." That is not the language of love. What is the difference 
between love and shopkeeping, if you ask God to give you this, and give you 
that? The first test of love is that it knows no bargaining. Love is always the 
giver, and never the taker. Says the child of God, "If God wants, I give Him my 
everything, but I do not want anything of Him. I want nothing in this universe. 

I love Him, because I want to love Him, and I ask no favour in return. Who 
cares whether God is almighty or not? I do not want any power from Him nor 
any manifestation of His power. Sufficient for me that He is the God of love. I 
ask no more question." 

The second test is that love knows no fear. So long as man thinks of God as a 
Being sitting above the clouds, with rewards in one hand and punishments in 


the other, there can be no love. Can you frighten one into love? Does the lamb 
love the lion? The mouse, the cat? The slave, the master? Slaves sometimes 
simulate love, but is it love? Where do you ever see love in fear? It is always a 
sham. With love never comes the idea of fear. Think of a young mother in the 
street: if a dog barks at her, she flees into the nearest house. The next day she is 
in the street with her child, and suppose a lion rushes upon the child, where will 
be her position? Just at the mouth of the lion, protecting her child. Love 
conquered all her fear. So also in the love of God. Who cares whether God is a 
rewarder or a punisher? That is not the thought of a lover. Think of a judge 
when he comes home, what does his wife see in him? Not a Judge, or a 
re warder or punisher, but her husband, her love. What do his children see in 
him? Their loving father, not the punisher or rewarder. So the children of God 
never see in Him a punisher or a rewarder. It is only people who have never 
tasted of love that fear and quake. Cast off all fear — though these horrible 
ideas of God as a punisher or re warder may have their use in savage minds. 
Some men, even the most intellectual, are spiritual savages, and these ideas 
may help them. But to men who are spiritual, men who are approaching 
religion, in whom spiritual insight is awakened, such ideas are simply childish, 
simply foolish. Such men reject all ideas of fear. 

The third is a still higher test. Love is always the highest ideal. When one has 
passed through the first two stages, when one has thrown off all shopkeeping, 
and cast off all fear, one then begins to realise that love is always the highest 
ideal. How many times in this world we see a beautiful woman loving an ugly 
man? How many times we see a handsome man loving an ugly woman! What 
is the attraction? Lookers-on only see the ugly man or the ugly woman, but not 
so the lover; to the lover the beloved is the most beautiful being that ever 
existed. How is it? The woman who loves the ugly man takes, as it were, the 
ideal of beauty which is in her own mind, and projects it on this ugly man; and 
what she worships and loves is not the ugly man, but her own ideal. That man 
is, as it were, only the suggestion, and upon that suggestion she throws her own 
ideal, and covers it; and it becomes her object of worship. Now, this applies in 
every case where we love. Many of us have very ordinary looking brothers or 
sisters; yet the very idea of their being brothers or sisters makes them beautiful 
to us. 



The philosophy in the background is that each one projects his own ideal and 
worships that. This external world is only the world of suggestion. All that we 
see, we project out of our own minds. A grain of sand gets washed into the 
shell of an oyster and irritates it. The irritation produces a secretion in the 
oyster, which covers the grain of sand and the beautiful pearl is the result. 
Similarly, external things furnish us with suggestions, over which we project 
our own ideals and make our objects. The wicked see this world as a perfect 
hell, and the good as a perfect heaven. Lovers see this world as full of love, and 
haters as full of hatred; fighters see nothing but strife, and the peaceful nothing 
but peace. The perfect man sees nothing but God. So we always worship our 
highest ideal, and when we have reached the point, when we love the ideal as 
the ideal, all arguments and doubts vanish for ever. Who cares whether God 
can be demonstrated or not? The ideal can never go, because it is a part of my 
own nature. I shall only question the ideal when I question my own existence, 
and as I cannot question the one, I cannot question the other. Who cares 
whether God can be almighty and all-merciful at the same time or not ? Who 
cares whether He is the rewarder of mankind, whether He looks at us with the 
eyes of a tyrant or with the eyes of a beneficent monarch? 

The lover has passed beyond all these things, beyond rewards and punishments, 
beyond fears and doubts, beyond scientific or any other demonstration. 
Sufficient unto him is the ideal of love, and is it not self-evident that this 
universe is but a manifestation of this love? What is it that makes atoms unite 
with atoms, molecules with molecules, and causes planets to fly towards each 
other? What is it that attracts man to man, man to woman, woman to man, and 
animals to animals, drawing the whole universe, as it were, towards one centre? 
It is what is called love. Its manifestation is from the lowest atom to the highest 
being: omnipotent, all-pervading, is this love. What manifests itself as 
attraction in the sentient and the insentient, in the particular and in the 
universal, is the love of God. It is the one motive power that is in the universe. 
Under the impetus of that love, Christ gives his life for humanity, Buddha even 
for an animal, the mother for the child, the husband for the wife. It is under the 
impetus of the same love that men are ready to give up their lives for their 
country, and strange to say, under the impetus of the same love, the thief steals, 
the murderer murders. Even in these cases, the spirit is the same, but the 
manifestation is different. This is the one motive power in the universe. The 


thief has love for gold; the love is there, but it is misdirected. So, in all crimes, 
as well as in all virtuous actions, behind stands that eternal love. Suppose a 
man writes a cheque for a thousand dollars for the poor of New York, and at 
the same time, in the same room, another man forges the name of a friend. The 
light by which both of them write is the same, but each one will be responsible 
for the use he makes of it. It is not the light that is to be praised or blamed. 
Unattached, yet shining in everything, is love, the motive power of the 
universe, without which the universe would fall to pieces in a moment, and this 
love is God. 

"None, O beloved, loves the husband for the husband's sake, but for the Self 
that is in the husband; none, O beloved, ever loves the wife for the wife's sake, 
but for the Self that is in the wife. None ever loves anything else, except for the 
Self." Even this selfishness, which is so much condemned, is but a 
manifestation of the same love. Stand aside from this play, do not mix in it, but 
see this wonderful panorama, this grand drama, played scene after scene, and 
hear this wonderful harmony; all are the manifestation of the same love. Even 
in selfishness, that self will multiply, grow and grow. That one self, the one 
man, will become two selves when he gets married; several, when he gets 
children; and thus he grows until he feels the whole world as his Self, the 
whole universe as his Self. He expands into one mass of universal love, infinite 
love — the love that is God. 

Thus we come to what is called supreme Bhakti, supreme devotion, in which 
forms and symbols fall off. One who has reached that cannot belong to any 
sect, for all sects are in him. To what shall he belong? Eor all churches and 
temples are in him. Where is the church big enough for him? Such a man 
cannot bind himself down to certain limited forms. Where is the limit for 
unlimited love, with which he has become one? In all religions which take up 
this ideal of love, we find the struggle to express it. Although we understand 
what this love means and see that everything in this world of affections and 
attractions is a manifestation of that Infinite Love, the expression of which has 
been attempted by sages and saints of different nations, yet we find them using 
all the powers of language, transfiguring even the most carnal expression into 
the divine. 



Thus sang the royal Hebrew sage, thus sang they of India. "O beloved, one kiss 
of Thy lips! Kissed by Thee, one's thirst for Thee increaseth for ever! All 
sorrows cease, one forgets the past, present, and future, and only thinks of Thee 
alone." That is the madness of the lover, when all desires have vanished. "Who 
cares for salvation? Who cares to be saved? Who cares to be perfect even? 

Who cares for freedom?" — says the lover. "I do not want wealth, nor even 
health; I do not want beauty, I do not want intellect: let me be born again and 
again, amid all the evils that are in the world; I will not complain, but let me 
love Thee, and that for love's sake." 

That is the madness of love which finds expression in these songs. The highest, 
most expressive, strongest, and most attractive human love is that between man 
and woman, and, therefore, that language was used in expressing the deepest, 
devotion. The madness of this human love was the faintest echo of the mad 
love of the saints. The true lovers of God want to become mad, inebriated with 
the love of God, to become "God-intoxicated men". They want to drink of the 
cup of love which has been prepared by the saints and sages of every religion, 
who have poured their heart's blood into it, and in which hare been 
concentrated all the hopes of those who have loved God without seeking 
reward, who wanted love for itself only. The reward of love is love, and what a 
reward it is! It is the only thing that takes off all sorrows, the only cup, by the 
drinking of which this disease of the world vanishes Man becomes divinely 
mad and forgets that be is man. 

Lastly, we find that all these various systems, in the end, converge to that one 
point, that perfect union. We always begin as dualists. God is a separate Being, 
and I am a separate being. Love comes between, and man begins to approach 
God, and God, as it were, begins to approach man. Man takes up all the various 
relationships of life, as father, mother, friend, or lover; and the last point is 
reached when he becomes one with the object of worship. "I am you, and you 
are I; and worshipping you, I worship myself; and in worshipping myself, I 
worship you." There we find the highest culmination of that with which man 
begins. At the beginning it was love for the self, but the claims of the little self 
made love selfish; at the end came the full blaze of light, when that self had 
become the Infinite. That God who at first was a Being somewhere, became 
resolved, as it were, into Infinite Love. Man himself was also transformed. He 



was approaching God, he was throwing off all vain desires, of which he was 
full before. With desires vanished selfishness, and, at the apex, he found that 
Love, Lover, and Beloved were One. 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER I 

THE NECESSITY OF RELIGION 

{Delivered in London) 

Of all the forces that have worked and are still working to mould the destinies 
of the human race, none, certainly, is more potent than that, the manifestation 
of which we call religion. All social organisations have as a background, 
somewhere, the workings of that peculiar force, and the greatest cohesive 
impulse ever brought into play amongst human units has beer derived from this 
power. It is obvious to all of us that in very many cases the bonds of religion 
have proved stronger than the bonds of race, or climate, or even of descent. It is 
a well-known fact that persons worshipping the same God, believing in the 
same religion, have stood by each other, with much greater strength and 
constancy, than people of merely the same descent, or even brothers. Various 
attempts have been made to trace the beginnings of religion. In all the ancient 
religions which have come down to us at the present day, we find one claim 
made — that they are all supernatural, that their genesis is not, as it were, in the 
human brain, but that they have originated somewhere outside of it. 

Two theories have gained some acceptance amongst modern scholars. One is 
the spirit theory of religion, the other the evolution of the idea of the Infinite. 
One party maintains that ancestor worship is the beginning of religious ideas; 
the other, that religion originates in the personification of the powers of nature. 
Man wants to keep up the memory of his dead relatives and thinks they are 
living even when the body is dissolved, and he wants to place food for them 
and, in a certain sense, to worship them. Out of that came the growth we call 
religion. 

Studying the ancient religions of the Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese, and 
many other races in America and elsewhere, we find very clear traces of this 
ancestor worship being the beginning of religion. With the ancient Egyptians, 
the first idea of the soul was that of a double. Every human body contained in it 
another being very similar to it; and when a man died, this double went out of 






the body and yet lived on. But the life of the double lasted only so long as the 
dead body remained intact, and that is why we find among the Egyptians so 
much solicitude to keep the body uninjured. And that is why they built those 
huge pyramids in which they preserved the bodies. For, if any portion of the 
external body was hurt, the double would be correspondingly injured. This is 
clearly ancestor worship. With the ancient Babylonians we find the same idea 
of the double, but with a variation. The double lost all sense of love; it 
frightened the living to give it food and drink, and to help it in various ways. It 
even lost all affection for its own children and its own wife. Among the ancient 
Hindus also, we find traces of this ancestor worship. Among the Chinese, the 
basis of their religion may also be said to be ancestor worship, and it still 
permeates the length and breadth of that vast country. In fact, the only religion 
that can really be said to flourish in China is that of ancestor worship. Thus it 
seems, on the one hand, a very good position is made out for those who hold 
the theory of ancestor worship as the beginning of religion. 

On the other hand, there are scholars who from the ancient Aryan literature 
show that religion originated in nature worship. Although in India we find 
proofs of ancestor worship everywhere, yet in the oldest records there is no 
trace of it whatsoever. In the Rig-Veda Samhita, the most ancient record of the 
Aryan race, we do not find any trace of it. Modern scholars think, it is the 
worship of nature that they find there. The human mind seems to struggle to get 
a peep behind the scenes. The dawn, the evening, the hurricane, the stupendous 
and gigantic forces of nature, its beauties, these have exercised the human 
mind, and it aspires to go beyond, to understand something about them. In the 
struggle they endow these phenomena with personal attributes, giving them 
souls and bodies, sometimes beautiful, sometimes transcendent. Every attempt 
ends by these phenomena becoming abstractions whether personalised or not. 
So also it is found with the ancient Greeks; their whole mythology is simply 
this abstracted nature worship. So also with the ancient Germans, the 
Scandinavians, and all the other Aryan races. Thus, on this side, too, a very 
strong case has been made out, that religion has its origin in the personification 
of the powers of nature. 

These two views, though they seem to be contradictory, can be reconciled on a 
third basis, which, to my mind, is the real germ of religion, and that I propose 


to call the struggle to transcend the limitations of the senses. Either, man goes 
to seek for the spirits of his ancestors, the spirits of the dead, that is, he wants to 
get a glimpse of what there is after the body is dissolved, or, he desires to 
understand the power working behind the stupendous phenomena of nature. 
Whiehever of these is the case, one thing is eertain, that he tries to transeend 
the limitations of the senses. He cannot remain satisfied with his senses; he 
wants to go beyond them. The explanation need not be mysterious. To me it 
seems very natural that the first glimpse of religion should come through 
dreams. The first idea of immortality man may well get through dreams. Is that 
not a most wonderful state? And we know that children and untutored minds 
find very little difference between dreaming and their awakened state. What 
can be more natural than that they find, as natural logic, that even during the 
sleep state when the body is apparently dead, the mind goes on with all its 
intricate workings? What wonder that men will at once come to the conclusion 
that when this body is dissolved for ever, the same working will go on? This, to 
my mind, would be. a more natural explanation of the supernatural, and 
through this dream idea the human mind rises to higher and higher conceptions. 
Of course, in time, the vast majority of mankind found out that these dreams 
are not verified by their waking states, and that during the dream state it is not 
that man has a fresh existence, but simply that he recapitulates the experienees 
of the awakened state. 

But by this time the search had begun, and the search was inward, arid man 
continued inquiring more deeply into the different stages of the mind and 
discovered higher states than either the waking or the dreaming. This state of 
things we find in all the organised religions of the world, called either ecstasy 
or inspiration. In all organised religions, their founders, prophets, and 
messengers are deelared to have gone into states of mind that were neither 
waking nor sleeping, in which they eame face to faee with a new series of facts 
relating to what is called the spiritual kingdom. They realised things there much 
more intensely than we realise facts around us in our waking state. Take, for 
instanee, the religions of the Brahmins. The Vedas are said to be written by 
Rishis. These Rishis were sages who realised eertain facts. The exact definition 
of the Sanskrit word Rishi is a Seer of Mantras — of the thoughts conveyed in 
the Vedic hymns. These men declared that they had realised — sensed, if that 
word can be used with regard to the supersensuous — certain facts, and these 





facts they proceeded to put on record. We find the same truth declared amongst 
both the Jews and the Christians. 

Some exceptions may be taken in the case of the Buddhists as represented by 
the Southern sect. It may be asked — if the Buddhists do not believe in any 
God or soul, how can their religion be derived from the supersensuous state of 
existence? The answer to this is that even the Buddhists find an eternal moral 
law, and that moral law was not reasoned out in our sense of the word But 
Buddha found it, discovered it, in a supersensuous state. Those of you who 
have studied the life of Buddha even as briefly given in that beautiful poem. 

The Light of Asia, may remember that Buddha is represented as sitting under 
the Bo-tree until he reached that supersensuous state of mind. All his teachings 
came through this, and not through intellectual cogitations. 

Thus, a tremendous statement is made by all religions; that the human mind, at 
certain moments, transcends not only the limitations of the senses, but also the 
power of reasoning. It then comes face to face with facts which it could never 
have sensed, could never hive reasoned out. These facts are the basis of all the 
religions of the world. Of course we have the right to challenge these facts, to 
put them to the test of reason. Nevertheless, all the existing religions of the 
world claim for the human mind this peculiar power of transcending the limits 
of the senses and the limits of reason; and this power they put forward as a 
statement of faet. 

Apart from the consideration of tie question how far these facts claimed by 
religions are true, we find one characteristic common to them all. They are all 
abstractions as contrasted with the concrete discoveries of physics, for instance; 
and in all the highly organised religions they take the purest form of Unit 
Abstraction, either in the form of an Abstracted Presence, as an Omnipresent 
Being, as an Abstract Personality called God, as a Moral Law, or in the form of 
an Abstraet Essence underlying every existence. In modern times, too, the 
attempts made to preaeh religions without appealing to the supersensuous state 
if the mind have had to take up the old abstractions of the Ancients and give 
different names to them as "Moral Law", the "Ideal Unity", and so forth, thus 
showing that these abstraetions are not in the senses. None of us have yet seen 
an "Ideal Human Being", and yet we are told to believe in it. None of us have 



yet seen an ideally perfect man, and yet without that ideal we cannot progress. 
Thus, this one fact stands out from all these different religions, that there is an 
Ideal Unit Abstraction, which is put before us, either in the form of a Person or 
an Impersonal Being, or a Law, or a Presence, or an Essence. We are always 
struggling to raise ourselves up to that ideal. Every human being, whosoever 
and wheresoever he may be, has an ideal of infinite power. Every human being 
has an ideal of infinite pleasure. Most of the works that we find around us, the 
activities displayed everywhere, are due to the struggle for this infinite power 
or this infinite pleasure. But a few quickly discover that although they are 
struggling for infinite power, it is not through the senses that it can be reached. 
They find out very soon that that infinite pleasure is not to be got through the 
senses, or, in other words, the senses are too limited, and the body is too 
limited, to express the Infinite. To manifest the Infinite through the finite is 
impossible, and sooner or later, man learns to give up the attempt to express the 
Infinite through the finite. This giving up, this renunciation of the attempt, is 
the background of ethics. Renunciation is the very basis upon which ethics 
stands. There never was an ethical code preached which had not renunciation 
for its basis. 

Ethics always says, "Not I, but thou." Its motto is, "Not self, but non-self." The 
vain ideas of individualism, to which man clings when he is trying to find that 
Infinite Power or that Infinite Pleasure through the senses, have to be given up 
— say the laws of ethics. You have to put yourself last, and others before you. 
The senses say, "Myself first." Ethics says, "I must hold myself last." Thus, all 
codes of ethics are based upon this renunciation; destruction, not construction, 
of the individual on the material plane. That Infinite will never find expression 
upon the material plane, nor is it possible or thinkable. 

So, man has to give up the plane of matter and rise to other spheres to seek a 
deeper expression of that Infinite. In this way the various ethical laws are being 
moulded, but all have that one central idea, eternal self-abnegation. Perfect self- 
annihilation is the ideal of ethics. People are startled if they are asked not to 
think of their individualities. They seem so very much afraid of losing what 
they call their individuality. At the same time, the same men would declare the 
highest ideals of ethics to be right, never for a moment thinking that the scope, 
the goal, the idea of all ethics is the destruction, and not the building up, of the 



individual. 


Utilitarian standards cannot explain the ethical relations of men, for, in the first 
place, we cannot derive any ethical laws from considerations of utility. Without 
the supernatural sanction as it is called, or the perception of the superconscious 
as I prefer to term it, there can be no ethics. Without the struggle towards the 
Infinite there can be no ideal. Any system that wants to bind men down to the 
limits of their own societies is not able to find an explanation for the ethical 
laws of mankind. The Utilitarian wants us to give up the struggle after the 
Infinite, the reaching-out for the Supersensuous, as impracticable and absurd, 
and, in the same breath, asks us to take up ethics and do good to society. Why 
should we do good? Doing good is a secondary consideration. We must have 
an ideal. Ethies itself is not the end, but the means to the end. If the end is not 
there, why should we be ethical? Why should I do good to other men, and not 
injure them? If happiness is the goal of mankind, why should I not make myself 
happy and others unhappy? What prevents me? In the seeond plaee, the basis of 
utility is too narrow. All the current social forms and methods are derived from 
society as it exists, but what right has the Utilitarian to assume that society is 
eternal? Society did not exist ages ago, possibly will not exist ages hence. Most 
probably it is one of the passing stages through which we are going towards a 
higher evolution, and any law that is derived from society alone cannot be 
eternal, cannot cover the whole ground of man's nature. At best, therefore. 
Utilitarian theories can only work under present social conditions. Beyond that 
they have no value. But a morality an ethical code, derived from religion and 
spirituality, has the whole of infinite man for its scope. It takes up the 
individual, but its relations are to the Infinite, and it takes up society also — 
beeause society is nothing but numbers of these individuals grouped together; 
and as it applies to the individual and his eternal relations, it must neeessarily 
apply to the whole of society, in whatever eondition it may be at any given 
time. Thus we see that there is always the necessity of spiritual religion for 
mankind. Man cannot always think of matter, however pleasurable it may be. 

It has been said that too much attention to things spiritual disturbs our practical 
relations in this world. As far back as in the days of the Chinese sage 
Confucius, it was said, "Let us take care of this world: and then, when we have 
finished with this world, we will take care of other world." It is very well that 



we should take care of this world. But if too much attention to the spiritual may 
affect a little our practical relations, too much attention to the so-called 
practical hurts us here and hereafter. It makes us materialistic. For man is not to 
regard nature as his goal, but something higher. 

Man is man so long as he is struggling to rise above nature, and this nature is 
both internal and external. Not only does it comprise the laws that govern the 
particles of matter outside us and in our bodies, but also the more subtle nature 
within, which is, in fact, the motive power governing the external. It is good 
and very grand to conquer external nature, but grander still to conquer our 
internal nature. It is grand and good to know the laws that govern the stars and 
planets; it is infinitely grander and better to know the laws that govern the 
passions, the feelings, the will, of mankind. This conquering of the inner man, 
understanding the secrets of the subtle workings that are within the human 
mind, and knowing its wonderful secrets, belong entirely to religion. Human 
nature — the ordinary human nature, I mean — wants to see big material facts. 
The ordinary man cannot understand anything that is subtle. Well has it been 
said that the masses admire the lion that kills a thousand lambs, never for a 
moment thinking that it is death to the lambs. Although a momentary triumph 
for the lion; because they find pleasure only in manifestations of physical 
strength. Thus it is with the ordinary run of mankind. They understand and find 
pleasure in everything that is external. But in every society there is a section 
whose pleasures are not in the senses, but beyond, and who now and then catch 
glimpses of something higher than matter and struggle to reach it. And if we 
read the history of nations between the lines, we shall always find that the rise 
of a nation comes with an increase in the number of such men; and the fall 
begins when this pursuit after the Infinite, however vain Utilitarians may call it, 
has ceased. That is to say, the mainspring of the strength Of every race lies in 
its spirituality, and the death of that race begins the day that spirituality wanes 
and materialism gains ground. 

Thus, apart from the solid facts and truths that we may learn from religion, 
apart from the comforts that we may gain from it, religion, as a science, as a 
study, is the greatest and healthiest exercise that the human mind can have. 

This pursuit of the Infinite, this struggle to grasp the Infinite, this effort to get 
beyond the limitations of the senses — out of matter, as it were — and to 







evolve the spiritual man — this striving day and night to make the Infinite one 
with our being — this struggle itself is the grandest and most glorious that man 
can make. Some persons find the greatest pleasure in eating. We have no right 
to say that they should not. Others find the greatest pleasure in possessing 
certain things. We have no right to say that they should not. But they also have 
no right to say "no" to the man who finds his highest pleasure in spiritual 
thought. The lower the organisation, the greater the pleasure in the senses. Very 
few men can eat a meal with the same gusto as a dog or a wolf. But all the 
pleasures of the dog or the wolf have gone, as it were into the senses. The 
lower types of humanity in all nations find pleasure in the senses, while the 
cultured and the educated find it in thought, in philosophy, in arts and sciences. 
Spirituality is a still higher plane. The subject being infinite, that plane is the 
highest, and the pleasure there is the highest for those who can appreciate it. 

So, even on the utilitarian ground that man is to seek for pleasure, he should 
cultivate religious thought, for it is the highest pleasure that exists. Thus 
religion, as a study, seems to me to be absolutely necessary. 

We can see it in its effects. It is the greatest motive power that moves the 
human mind No other ideal can put into us the same mass of energy as the 
spiritual. So far as human history goes, it is obvious to all of us that this has 
been the case and that its powers are not dead. I do not deny that men, on 
simply utilitarian grounds, can be very good and moral. There have been many 
great men in this world perfectly sound, moral, and good, simply on utilitarian 
grounds. But the world-movers, men who bring, as It were, a mass of 
magnetism into the world whose spirit works in hundreds and in thousands, 
whose life ignites others with a spiritual fire — such men, we always find, have 
that spiritual background. Their motive power came from religion. Religion is 
the greatest motive power for realising that infinite energy which is the 
birthright and nature of every man. In building up character in making for 
everything that is good and great, in bringing peace to others and peace to one's 
own self, religion is the highest motive power and, therefore, ought to be 
studied from that standpoint. Religion must be studied on a broader basis than 
formerly. All narrow limited, fighting ideas of religion have to go. All sect 
ideas and tribal or national ideas of religion must be given up. That each tribe 
or nation should have its own particular God and think that every other is 
wrong is a superstition that should belong to the past. All such ideas must be 



abandoned. 


As the human mind broadens, its spiritual steps broaden too. The time has 
already come when a man cannot record a thought without its reaching to all 
corners of the earth; by merely physical means, we have come into touch with 
the whole world; so the future religions of the world have to become as 
universal, as wide. 

The religious ideals of the future must embrace all that exists in the world and 
is good and great, and, at the same time, have infinite scope for future 
development. All that was good in the past must be preserved; and the doors 
must be kept open for future additions to the already existing store. Religions 
must also be inclusive and not look down with contempt upon one another 
because their particular ideals of Cod are different. In my life I have seen a 
great many spiritual men, a great many sensible persons, who did not believe in 
God at all that is to say, not in our sense of the word. Perhaps they understood 
God better than we can ever do. The Personal idea of God or the Impersonal, 
the Infinite, Moral Law, or the Ideal Man — these all have to come under the 
definition of religion. And when religions have become thus broadened, their 
power for good will have increased a hundredfold. Religions, having 
tremendous power in them, have often done more injury to the world than 
good, simply on account of their narrowness and limitations. 

Even at the present time we find many sects and societies, with almost the same 
ideas, fighting each other, because one does not want to set forth those ideas in 
precisely the same way as another. Therefore, religions will have to broaden. 
Religious ideas will have to become universal, vast, and infinite; and then alone 
we shall have the fullest play of religion, for the power of religion has only just 
begun to manifest in the world. It is sometimes said that religions are dying out, 
that spiritual ideas are dying out of the world. To me it seems that they have 
just begun to grow. The power of religion, broadened and purified, is going to 
penetrate every part of human life. So long as religion was in the hands of a 
chosen few or of a body of priests, it was in temples, churches, books, dogmas, 
ceremonials, forms, and rituals. But when we come to the real, spiritual, 
universal concept, then, and then alone religion will become real and living; it 
will come into our very nature, live in our every movement, penetrate every 



pore of our society, and be infinitely more a power for good than it has ever 
been before. 

What is needed is a fellow-feeling between the different types of religion, 
seeing that they all stand or fall together, a fellow-feeling which springs from 
mutual esteem and mutual respect, and not the condescending, patronising, 
niggardly expression of goodwill, unfortunately in vogue at the present time 
with many. And above all, this is needed between types of religious expression 
coming from the study of mental phenomena — unfortunately, even now 
laying exclusive claim to the name of religion — and those expressions of 
religion whose heads, as it were, are penetrating more into the secrets of heaven 
though their feet are clinging to earth, I mean the so-called materialistic 
sciences. 

To bring about this harmony, both will have to make concessions, sometimes 
very large, nay more, sometimes painful, but each will find itself the better for 
the sacrifice and more advanced in truth. And in the end, the knowledge which 
is confined within the domain of time and space will meet and become one 
with that which is beyond them both, where the mind and senses cannot reach 
— the Absolute, the Infinite, the One without a second. 


» 




Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 2 

Jnana-Yoga 

The Necessity of Religion 

The Real Nature of Man 

Maya and Illusion 

Maya and the Evolution of the Conception of God 

Maya and Freedom 

The Absolute and Manifestation 

God in Everything 

Realisation 
Unity in Diversity 
The Freedom of the Soul 
The Cosmos: The Macrocosm 

The Cosmos: The Microcosm 

Immortality 

The Atman 


The Atman: Its Bondage and Freedom 



















The Real and the Apparent Man 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER II 

THE REAL NATURE OF MAN 

{Delivered in London) 

Great is the tenacity with which man clings to the senses. Yet, however 
substantial he may think the external world in which he lives and moves, there 
comes a time in the lives of individuals and of races when, involuntarily, they 
ask, "Is this real?" To the person who never finds a moment to question the 
credentials of his senses, whose every moment is occupied with some sort of 
sense-enjoyment — even to him death comes, and he also is compelled to ask, 
"Is this real?" Religion begins with this question and ends with its answer. 
Even in the remote past, where recorded history cannot help us, in the 
mysterious light of mythology, back in the dim twilight of civilisation, we find 
the same question was asked, "What becomes of this? What is real?" 

One of the most poetical of the Upanishads, the Katha Upanishad, begins with 
the inquiry: "When a man dies, there is a dispute. One party declares that he 
has gone for ever, the other insists that he is still living. Which is true?" 
Various answers have been given. The whole sphere of metaphysics, 
philosophy, and religion is really filled with various answers to this question. 
At the same time, attempts have been made to suppress it, to put a stop to the 
unrest of mind which asks, "What is beyond? What is real?" But so long as 
death remains, all these attempts at suppression will always prove to be 
unsuccessful. We may talk about seeing nothing beyond and keeping all our 
hopes and aspirations confined to the present moment, and struggle hard not to 
think of anything beyond the world of senses; and, perhaps, everything outside 
helps to keep us limited within its narrow bounds. The whole world may 
combine to prevent us from broadening out beyond the present. Yet, so long as 
there is death, the question must come again and again, "Is death the end of all 
these things to which we are clinging, as if they were the most real of all 
realities, the most substantial of all substances?" The world vanishes in a 
moment and is gone. Standing on the brink of a precipice beyond which is the 
infinite yawning chasm, every mind, however hardened, is bound to recoil and 







ask, "Is this real?" The hopes of a lifetime, built up little by little with all the 
energies of a great mind, vanish in a second. Are they real? This question must 
be answered. Time never lessens its power; on the other hand, it adds strength 
to it. 

Then there is the desire to be happy. We run after everything to make ourselves 
happy; we pursue our mad career in the external world of senses. If you ask the 
young man with whom life is successful, he will declare that it is real; and he 
really thinks so. Perhaps, when the same man grows old and finds fortune ever 
eluding him, he will then declare that it is fate. He finds at last that his desires 
cannot be fulfilled. Wherever he goes, there is an adamantine wall beyond 
which he cannot pass. Every sense-activity results in a reaction. Everything is 
evanescent. Enjoyment, misery, luxury, wealth, power, and poverty, even life 
itself, are all evanescent. 

Two positions remain to mankind. One is to believe with the nihilists that all is 
nothing, that we know nothing, that we can never know anything either about 
the future, the past, or even the present. Eor we must remember that he who 
denies the past and the future and wants to stick to the present is simply a 
madman. One may as well deny the father and mother and assert the child. It 
would be equally logical. To deny the past and future, the present must 
inevitably be denied also. This is one position, that of the nihilists. I have never 
seen a man who could really become a nihilist for one minute. It is very easy to 
talk. 

Then there is the other position — to seek for an explanation, to seek for the 
real, to discover in the midst of this eternally changing and evanescent world 
whatever is real. In this body which is an aggregate of molecules of matter, is 
there anything which is real? This has been the search throughout the history of 
the, human mind. In the very oldest times, we often find glimpses of light 
coming into men's minds. We find man, even then, going a step beyond this 
body, finding something which is not this external body, although very much 
like it, much more complete, much more perfect, and which remains even when 
this body is dissolved. We read in the hymns of the Rig-Veda, addressed to the 
God of Eire who is burning a dead body, "Carry him, O Eire, in your arms 
gently, give him a perfect body, a bright body, carry him where the fathers live. 



where there is no more sorrow, where there is no more death." The same idea 
you will find present in every religion. And we get another idea with it. It is a 
significant fact that all religions, without one exception, hold that man is a 
degeneration of what he was, whether they clothe this in mythological words, 
or in the clear language of philosophy, or in the beautiful expressions of poetry. 
This is the one fact that comes out of every scripture and of every mythology 
that the man that is, is a degeneration of what he was. This is the kernel of truth 
within the story of Adam's fall in the Jewish scripture. This is again and again 
repeated in the scriptures of the Hindus; the dream of a period which they call 
the Age of Truth, when no man died unless he wished to die, when he could 
keep his body as long as he liked, and his mind was pure and strong. There was 
no evil and no misery; and the present age is a corruption of that state of 
perfection. Side by side with this, we find the story of the deluge everywhere. 
That story itself is a proof that this present age is held to be a corruption of a 
former age by every religion. It went on becoming more and more corrupt until 
the deluge swept away a large portion of mankind, and again the ascending 
series began. It is going up slowly again to reach once more that early state of 
purity. You are all aware of the story of the deluge in the Old Testament. The 
same story was current among the ancient Babylonians, the Egyptians, the 
Chinese, and the Hindus. Manu, a great ancient sage, was praying on the bank 
of the Ganga, when a little minnow came to him for protection, and he put it 
into a pot of water he had before him. "What do you want?" asked Manu. The 
little minnow declared he was pursued by a bigger fish and wanted protection. 
Manu carried the little fish to his home, and in the morning he had become as 
big as the pot and said, "I cannot live in this pot any longer". Manu put him in a 
tank, and the next day he was as big as the tank and declared he could not live 
there any more. So Manu had to take him to a river, and in the morning the fish 
filled the river. Then Manu put him in the ocean, and he declared, "Manu, I am 
the Creator of the universe. I have taken this form to come and warn you that I 
will deluge the world. You build an ark and in it put a pair of every kind of 
animal, and let your family enter the ark, and there will project out of the water 
my horn. Fasten the ark to it; and when the deluge subsides, come out and 
people the earth." So the world was deluged, and Manu saved his own family 
and two of every kind of animal and seeds of every plant. When the deluge 
subsided, he came and peopled the world; and we are all called "man", because 
we are the progeny of Manu. 


Now, human language is the attempt to express the truth that is within. I am 
fully persuaded that a baby whose language consists of unintelligible sounds is 
attempting to express the highest philosophy, only the baby has not the organs 
to express it nor the means. The difference between the language of the highest 
philosophers and the utterances of babies is one of degree and not of kind. 

What you call the most correct, systematic, mathematical language of the 
present time, and the hazy, mystical, mythological languages of the ancients, 
differ only in degree. All of them have a grand idea behind, which is, as it 
were, struggling to express itself; and often behind these ancient mythologies 
are nuggets of truth; and often, I am sorry to say, behind the fine, polished 
phrases of the moderns is arrant trash. So, we need not throw a thing overboard 
because it is clothed in mythology, because it does not fit in with the notions of 
Mr. So-and-so or Mrs. So-and-so of modern times. If people should laugh at 
religion because most religions declare that men must believe in mythologies 
taught by such and such a prophet, they ought to laugh more at these moderns. 
In modern times, if a man quotes a Moses or a Buddha or a Christ, he is 
laughed at; but let him give the name of a Huxley, a Tyndall, or a Darwin, and 
it is swallowed without salt. "Huxley has said it", that is enough for many. We 
are free from superstitions indeed! That was a religious superstition, and this a 
scientific superstition; only, in and through that superstition came life-giving 
ideas of spirituality; in and through this modern superstition come lust and 
greed. That superstition was worship of God, and this superstition is worship of 
filthy lucre, of fame or power. That is the difference. 

To return to mythology. Behind all these stories we find one idea standing 
supreme — that man is a degeneration of what he was. Coming to the present 
times, modern research seems to repudiate this position absolutely. 
Evolutionists seem to contradict entirely this assertion. According to them, man 
is the evolution of the mollusc; and, therefore, what mythology states cannot be 
true. There is in India, however, a mythology which is able to reconcile both 
these positions. The Indian mythology has a theory of cycles, that all 
progression is in the form of waves. Every wave is attended by a fall, and that 
by a rise the next moment, that by a fall in the next, and again another rise The 
motion is in cycles. Certainly it is true, even on the grounds of modern 
research, that man cannot be simply an evolution. Every evolution presupposes 


an involution. The modern scientific man will tell you that you can only get the 
amount of energy out of a machine which you have previously put into it. 
Something cannot be produced out of nothing. If a man is an evolution of the 
mollusc, then the perfect man — the Buddha-man, the Christ-man — was 
involved in the mollusc. If it is not so, whence come these gigantic 
personalities? Something cannot come out of nothing. Thus we are in the 
position of reconciling the scriptures with modern light. That energy which 
manifests itself slowly through various stages until it becomes the perfect man, 
cannot come out of nothing. It existed somewhere; and if the mollusc or the 
protoplasm is the first point to which you can trace it, that protoplasm, 
somehow or other, must have contained the energy. 

There is a great discussion going on as to whether the aggregate of materials 
we call the body is the cause of manifestation of the force we call the soul, 
thought, etc., or whether it is the thought that manifests this body. The religions 
of the world of course hold that the force called thought manifests the body, 
and not the reverse. There are schools of modern thought which hold that what 
we call thought is simply the outcome of the adjustment of the parts of the 
machine which we call body. Taking the second position that the soul or the 
mass of thought, or however you may call it, is the outcome of this machine, 
the outcome of the chemical and physical combinations of matter making up 
the body and brain, leaves the question unanswered. What makes the body? 
What force combines the molecules into the body form? What force is there 
which takes up material from the mass of matter around and forms my body 
one way, another body another way, and so on? What makes these infinite 
distinctions? To say that the force called soul is the outcome of the 
combinations of the molecules of the body is putting the cart before the horse. 
How did the combinations come; where was the force to make them? If you say 
that some other force was the cause of these combinations, and soul was the 
outcome of that matter, and that soul — which combined a certain mass of 
matter — was itself the result of the combinations, it is no answer. That theory 
ought to be taken which explains most of the facts, if not all, and that without 
contradicting other existing theories. It is more logical to say that the force 
which takes up the matter and forms the body is the same which manifests 
through that body. To say, therefore, that the thought forces manifested by the 
body are the outcome of the arrangement of molecules and have no 




independent existence has no meaning; neither can force evolve out of matter. 
Rather it is possible to demonstrate that what we call matter does not exist at 
all. It is only a certain state of force. Solidity, hardness, or any other state of 
matter can be proved to be the result of motion. Increase of vortex motion 
imparted to fluids gives them the force of solids. A mass of air in vortex 
motion, as in a tornado, becomes solid-like and by its impact breaks or cuts 
through solids. A thread of a spider's web, if it could be moved at almost 
infinite velocity, would be as strong as an iron chain and would cut through an 
oak tree. Looking at it in this way, it would be easier to prove that what we call 
matter does not exist. But the other way cannot be proved. 

What is the force which manifests itself through the body? It is obvious to all 
of us, whatever that force be, that it is taking particles up, as it were, and 
manipulating forms out of them — the human body. None else comes here to 
manipulate bodies for you and me. I never saw anybody eat food for me. I have 
to assimilate it, manufacture blood and bones and everything out of that food. 
What is this mysterious force? Ideas about the future and about the past seem to 
be terrifying to many. To many they seem to be mere speculation. 

We will take the present theme. What is this force which is now working 
through us? We know how in old times, in all the ancient scriptures, this 
power, this manifestation of power, was thought to be a bright substance 
having the form of this body, and which remained even after this body fell. 
Later on, however, we find a higher idea coming — that this bright body did 
not represent the force. Whatsoever has form must be the result of 
combinations of particles and requires something else behind it to move it. If 
this body requires something which is not the body to manipulate it, the bright 
body, by the same necessity, will also require something other than itself to 
manipulate it. So, that something was called the soul, the Atman in Sanskrit. It 
was the Atman which through the bright body, as it were, worked on the gross 
body outside. The bright body is considered as the receptacle of the mind, and 
the Atman is beyond that It is not the mind even; it works the mind, and 
through the mind the body. You have an Atman, I have another each one of us 
has a separate Atman and a separate fine body, and through that we work on 
the gross external body. Questions were then asked about this Atman about its 
nature. What is this Atman, this soul of man which is neither the body nor the 


mind? Great discussions followed. Speculations were made, various shades of 
philosophic inquiry came into existence; and I shall try to place before you 
some of the conclusions that have been reached about this Atman. 

The different philosophies seem to agree that this Atman, whatever it be, has 
neither form nor shape, and that which has neither form nor shape must be 
omnipresent. Time begins with mind, space also is in the mind. Causation 
cannot stand without time. Without the idea of succession there cannot be any 
idea of causation. Time, space and causation, therefore, are in the mind, and as 
this Atman is beyond the mind and formless, it must be beyond time, beyond 
space, and beyond causation. Now, if it is beyond time, space, and causation, it 
must be infinite. Then comes the highest speculation in our philosophy. The 
infinite cannot be two. If the soul be infinite, there can be only one Soul, and 
all ideas of various souls — you having one soul, and I having another, and so 
forth — are not real. The Real Man, therefore, is one and infinite, the 
omnipresent Spirit. And the apparent man is only a limitation of that Real Man. 
In that sense the mythologies are true that the apparent man, however great he 
may be, is only a dim reflection of the Real Man who is beyond. The Real 
Man, the Spirit, being beyond cause and effect, not bound by time and space, 
must, therefore, be free. He was never bound, and could not be bound. The 
apparent man, the reflection, is limited by time, space, and causation, and is, 
therefore, bound. Or in the language of some of our philosophers, he appears to 
be bound, but really is not. This is the reality in our souls, this omnipresence, 
this spiritual nature, this infinity. Every soul is infinite, therefore there is no 
question of birth and death. Some children were being examined. The examiner 
put them rather hard questions, and among them was this one: "Why does not 
the earth fall?" He wanted to evoke answers about gravitation. Most of the 
children could not answer at all; a few answered that it was gravitation or 
something. One bright little girl answered it by putting another question: 
"Where should it fall?" The question is nonsense. Where should the earth fall? 
There is no falling or rising for the earth. In infinite space there is no up or 
down; that is only in the relative. Where is the going or coming for the infinite? 
Whence should it come and whither should it go? 

Thus, when people cease to think of the past or future, when they give up the 
idea of body, because the body comes and goes and is limited, then they have 



risen to a higher ideal. The body is not the Real Man, neither is the mind, for 
the mind waxes and wanes. It is the Spirit beyond, which alone can live for 
ever. The body and mind are continually changing, and are, in fact, only names 
of series of changeful phenomena, like rivers whose waters are in a constant 
state of flux, yet presenting the appearance of unbroken streams. Every particle 
in this body is continually changing; no one has the same body for many 
minutes together, and yet we think of it as the same body. So with the mind; 
one moment it is happy, another moment unhappy; one moment strong, another 
weak; an ever-changing whirlpool. That cannot be the Spirit which is infinite. 
Change can only be in the limited. To say that the infinite changes in any way 
is absurd; it cannot be. You can move and I can move, as limited bodies; every 
particle in this universe is in a constant state of flux, but taking the universe as 
a unit, as one whole, it cannot move, it cannot change. Motion is always a 
relative thing. I move in relation to something else. Any particle in this 
universe can change in relation to any other particle; but take the whole 
universe as one, and in relation to what can it move? There is nothing besides 
it. So this infinite Unit is unchangeable, immovable, absolute, and this is the 
Real Man. Our reality, therefore, consists in the Universal and not in the 
limited. These are old delusions, however comfortable they are, to think that 
we are little limited beings, constantly changing. People are frightened when 
they are told that they are Universal Being, everywhere present. Through 
everything you work, through every foot you move, through every lip you talk, 
through every heart you feel. 

People are frightened when they are told this. They will again and again ask 
you if they are not going to keep their individuality. What is individuality? I 
should like to see it. A baby has no moustache; when he grows to be a man, 
perhaps he has a moustache and beard. His individuality would be lost, if it 
were in the body. If I lose one eye, or if I lose one of my hands, my 
individuality would be lost if it were in the body. Then, a drunkard should not 
give up drinking because he would lose his individuality. A thief should not be 
a good man because he would thereby lose his individuality. No man ought to 
change his habits for fear of this. There is no individuality except in the 
Infinite. That is the only condition which does not change. Everything else is in 
a constant state of flux. Neither can individuality be in memory. Suppose, on 
account of a blow on the head I forget all about my past; then, I have lost all 


individuality; I am gone. I do not remember two or three years of my 
childhood, and if memory and existence are one, then whatever I forget is gone. 
That part of my life which I do not remember, I did not live. That is a very 
narrow idea of individuality. 

We are not individuals yet. We are struggling towards individuality, and that is 
the Infinite, that is the real nature of man. He alone lives whose life is in the 
whole universe, and the more we concentrate our lives on limited things, the 
faster we go towards death. Those moments alone we live when our lives are in 
the universe, in others; and living this little life is death, simply death, and that 
is why the fear of death comes. The fear of death can only be conquered when 
man realises that so long as there is one life in this universe, he is living. When 
he can say, "I am in everything, in everybody, I am in all lives, I am the 
universe," then alone comes the state of fearlessness. To talk of immortality in 
constantly changing things is absurd. Says an old Sanskrit philosopher: It is 
only the Spirit that is the individual, because it is infinite. No infinity can be 
divided; infinity cannot be broken into pieces. It is the same one, undivided 
unit for ever, and this is the individual man, the Real Man. The apparent man is 
merely a struggle to express, to manifest this individuality which is beyond; 
and evolution is not in the Spirit. These changes which are going on — the 
wicked becoming good, the animal becoming man, take them in whatever way 
you like — are not in the Spirit. They are evolution of nature and manifestation 
of Spirit. Suppose there is a screen hiding you from me, in which there is a 
small hole through which I can see some of the faces before me, just a few 
faces. Now suppose the hole begins to grow larger and larger, and as it does so, 
more and more of the scene before me reveals itself and when at last the whole 
screen has disappeared, I stand face to face with you all. You did not change at 
all in this case; it was the hole that was evolving, and you were gradually 
manifesting yourselves. So it is with the Spirit. No perfection is going to be 
attained. You are already free and perfect. What are these ideas of religion and 
God and searching for the hereafter? Why does man look for a God? Why does 
man, in every nation, in every state of society, want a perfect ideal somewhere, 
either in man, in God, or elsewhere? Because that idea is within you. It was 
your own heart beating and you did not know; you were mistaking it for 
something external. It is the God within your own self that is propelling you to 
seek for Him, to realise Him. After long searches here and there, in temples and 




in churches, in earths and in heavens, at last you come back, completing the 
circle from where you started, to your own soul and find that He for whom you 
have been seeking all over the world, for whom you have been weeping and 
praying in churches and temples, on whom you were looking as the mystery of 
all mysteries shrouded in the clouds, is nearest of the near, is your own Self, the 
reality of your life, body, and soul. That is your own nature. Assert it, manifest 
it. Not to become pure, you are pure already. You are not to be perfect, you are 
that already. Nature is like that screen which is hiding the reality beyond. Every 
good thought that you think or act upon is simply tearing the veil, as it were; 
and the purity, the Infinity, the God behind, manifests Itself more and more. 

This is the whole history of man. Finer and finer becomes the veil, more and 
more of the light behind shines forth, for it is its nature to shine. It cannot be 
known; in vain we try to know it. Were it knowable, it would not be what it is, 
for it is the eternal subject. Knowledge is a limitation, knowledge is 
objectifying. He is the eternal subject of everything, the eternal witness in this 
universe, your own Self. Knowledge is, as it were, a lower step, a degeneration. 
We are that eternal subject already; how can we know it? It is the real nature of 
every man, and he is struggling to express it in various ways; otherwise, why 
are there so many ethical codes? Where is the explanation of all ethics? One 
idea stands out as the centre of all ethical systems, expressed in various forms, 
namely, doing good to others. The guiding motive of mankind should be 
charity towards men, charity towards all animals. But these are all various 
expressions of that eternal truth that, "I am the universe; this universe is one." 
Or else, where is the reason? Why should I do good to my fellowmen? Why 
should I do good to others? What compels me? It is sympathy, the feeling of 
sameness everywhere. The hardest hearts feel sympathy for other beings 
sometimes. Even the man who gets frightened if he is told that this assumed 
individuality is really a delusion, that it is ignoble to try to cling to this 
apparent individuality, that very man will tell you that extreme self-abnegation 
is the centre of all morality. And what is perfect self-abnegation? It means the 
abnegation of this apparent self, the abnegation of all selfishness. This idea of 
"me and mine" — Ahamkara and Mamata — is the result of past Superstition, 
and the more this present self pastes away, the more the real Self becomes 
manifest. This is true self-abnegation, the centre, the basis, the gist of all moral 
teaching; and whether man knows it or not the whole world is slowly going 



towards it, practicing it more or less. Only, the vast majority of mankind are 
doing it unconsciously. Let them do it consciously. Let then make the sacrifice, 
knowing that this "me and mine" is not the real Self, but only a limitation. But 
one glimpse Of that infinite reality which is behind — but one spark of that 
infinite fire that is the All — represents the present man; the Infinite is his true 
nature. 

What is the utility, the effect, the result, of this knowledge? In these days, we 
have to measure everything by utility — by how many pounds shillings, and 
pence it represents. What right has a person to ask that truth should be judged 
by the standard of utility or money? Suppose there is no utility, will it be less 
true? Utility is not the test of truth. Nevertheless, there is the highest utility in 
this. Happiness, we see is what everyone is seeking for, but the majority seek it 
in things which are evanescent and not real. No happiness was ever found in 
the senses. There never was a person who found happiness in the senses or in 
enjoyment of the senses. Happiness is only found id the Spirit. Therefore the 
highest utility for mankind is to find this happiness in the Spirit. The next point 
is that ignorance is the great mother of all misery, and the fundamental 
ignorance is to think that the Infinite weeps and cries, that He is finite. This is 
the basis of all ignorance that we, the immortal, the ever pure, the perfect 
Spirit, think that we are little minds, that we are little bodies; it is the mother of 
all selfishness. As soon as I think that I am a little body, I want to preserve it, to 
protect it, to keep it nice, at the expense of other bodies; then you and I become 
separate. As soon as this idea of separation comes, it opens the door to all 
mischief and leads to all misery. This is the utility that if a very small fractional 
part of human beings living today can put aside the idea of selfishness, 
narrowness, and littleness, this earth will become a paradise tomorrow; but 
with machines and improvements of material knowledge only, it will never be. 
These only increase misery, as oil poured on fire increases the flame all the 
more. Without the knowledge of the Spirit, all material knowledge is only 
adding fuel to fire, only giving into the hands of selfish man one more 
instrument to take what belongs to others, to live upon the life of others, instead 
of giving up his life for them. 


Is it practical ? — is another question. Can it be practised in modern society? 
Truth does not pay homage to any society, ancient or modern. Society has to 





pay homage to Truth or die. Societies should be moulded upon truth, and truth 
has not to adjust itself to society. If such a noble truth as unselfishness cannot 
be practiced in society, it is better for man to give up society and go into the 
forest. That is the daring man. There are two sorts of courage. One is the 
courage of facing the cannon. And the other is the courage of spiritual 
conviction. An Emperor who invaded India was told by his teacher to go and 
see some of the sages there. After a long search for one, he found a very old 
man sitting on a block of stone. The Emperor talked with him a little and 
became very much impressed by his wisdom. He asked the sage to go to his 
country with him. "No," said the sage, "I am quite satisfied with my forest 
here." Said the Emperor, "I will give you money, position, wealth. I am the 
Emperor of the world." "No," replied the man, "I don't care for those things." 
The Emperor replied, "I f you do not go, I will kill you." The man smiled 
serenely and said, "That is the most foolish thing you ever said. Emperor. You 
cannot kill me. Me the sun cannot dry, fire cannot burn, sword cannot kill, for I 
am the birthless, the deathless, the ever-living omnipotent, omnipresent Spirit." 
This is spiritual boldness, while the other is the courage of a lion or a tiger. In 
the Mutiny of 1857 there was a Swami, a very great soul, whom a 
Mohammedan mutineer stabbed severely. The Hindu mutineers caught and 
brought the man to the Swami, offering to kill him. But the Swami looked up 
calmly and said, "My brother, thou art He, thou art He!" and expired. This is 
another instance. What good is it to talk of the strength of your muscles, of the 
superiority of your Western institutions, if you cannot make Truth square with 
your society, if you cannot build up a society into which the highest Truth will 
fit? What is the good of this boastful talk about your grandeur and greatness, if 
you stand up and say, "This courage is not practical." Is nothing practical but 
pounds, shillings, and pence? If so, why boast of your society? That society is 
the greatest, where the highest truths become practical. That is my opinion; 
and if society is; not fit for the highest truths, make it so; and the sooner, the 
better. Stand up, men and women, in this spirit, dare to believe in the Truth, 
dare to practice the Truth! The world requires a few hundred bold men and 
women. Practise that boldness which dares know the Truth, which dares show 
the Truth in life, which does not quake before death, nay, welcomes death, 
makes a man know that he, is the Spirit, that, in the whole universe, nothing 
can kill him. Then you will be free. Then you will know yours real Soul. "This 
Atman is first to be heard, then thoughts about and then meditated upon." 


There is a great tendency in modern times to talk too much of work and decry 
thought. Doing is very good, but that comes from thinking. Little 
manifestations of energy through the muscles are called work. But where there 
is no thought, there will be no work. Fill the brain, therefore, with high 
thoughts, highest ideals, place them day and night before you, and out of that 
will come great work. Talk not about impurity, but say that we are pure. We 
have hypnotised ourselves into this thought that we are little, that we are born, 
and that we are going to die, and into a constant state of fear. 

There is a story about a lioness, who was big with young, going about in search 
of prey; and seeing a flock of sheep, she jumped upon them. She died in the 
effort; and a little baby lion was born, motherless. It was taken care of by the 
sheep and the sheep brought it up, and it grew up with them, ate grass, and 
bleated like the sheep. And although in time it became a big, full-grown lion, it 
thought it was a sheep. One day another lion came in search of prey and was 
astonished to find that in the midst of this flock of sheep was a lion, fleeing like 
the sheep at the approach of danger. He tried to get near the sheep-lion, to tell it 
that it was not a sheep but a lion; but the poor animal fled at his approach. 
However, he watched his opportunity and one day found the sheep-lion 
sleeping. He approached it and said, "You are a lion." "I am a sheep," cried the 
other lion and could not believe the contrary but bleated. The lion dragged him 
towards a lake and said, "Look here, here is my reflection and yours." Then 
came the comparison. It looked at the lion and then at its own reflection, and in 
a moment came the idea that it was a lion. The lion roared, the bleating was 
gone. You are lions, you are souls, pure, infinite, and perfect. The might of the 
universe is within you. "Why weepest thou, my friend? There is neither birth 
nor death for thee. Why weepest thou? There is no disease nor misery for thee, 
but thou art like the infinite sky; clouds of various colours come over it, play 
for a moment, then vanish. But the sky is ever the same eternal blue." Why do 
we see wickedness? There was a stump of a tree, and in the dark, a thief came 
that way and said, "That is a policeman." A young man waiting for his beloved 
saw it and thought that it was his sweetheart. A child who had been told ghost 
stories took it for a ghost and began to shriek. But all the time it was the stump 
of a tree. We see the world as we are. Suppose there is a baby in a room with a 
bag of gold on the table and a thief comes and steals the gold. Would the baby 


know it was stolen? That which we have inside, we see outside. The baby has 
no thief inside and sees no thief outside. So with all knowledge. Do not talk of 
the wickedness of the world and all its sins. Weep that you are bound to see 
wickedness yet. Weep that you are bound to see sin everywhere, and if you 
want to help the world, do not condemn it. Do not weaken it more. For what is 
sin and what is misery, and what are all these, but the results of weakness? The 
world is made weaker and weaker every day by such teachings. Men are taught 
from childhood that they are weak and sinners. Teach them that they are all 
glorious children of immortality, even those who are the weakest in 
manifestation. Let positive, strong, helpful thought enter into their brains from 
very childhood. Lay yourselves open to these thoughts, and not to weakening 
and paralysing ones. Say to your own minds, "I am He, I am He." Let it ring 
day and night in your minds like a song, and at the point of death declare "I am 
He." That is the Truth; the infinite strength of the world is yours. Drive out the 
superstition that has covered your minds. Let us be brave. Know the Truth and 
practice the Truth. The goal may be distant, but awake, arise, and stop not till 
the goal is reached. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER III 
MAYA AND ILLUSION 

{Delivered in London) 

Almost all of you have heard of the word Maya. Generally it is used, though 
incorrectly, to denote illusion, or delusion, or some such thing. But the theory 
of Maya forms one of the pillars upon which the Vedanta rests; it is, therefore, 
necessary that it should be properly understood. I ask a little patience of you, 
for there is a great danger of its being misunderstood. The oldest idea of Maya 
that we find in Vedic literature is the sense of delusion; but then the real theory 
had not been reached. We find such passages as, "Indra through his Maya 
assumed various forms." Here it is true the word Maya means something like 
magic, and we find various other passages, always taking the same meaning. 
The word Maya then dropped out of sight altogether. But in the meantime the 
idea was developing. Later, the question was raised: "Why can't we know this 
secret of the universe?" And the answer given was very significant: "Because 
we talk in vain, and because we are satisfied with the things of the senses, and 
because we are running after desires; therefore, we, as it were, cover the 
Reality with a mist." Here the word Maya is not used at all, but we get the idea 
that the cause of our ignorance is a kind of mist that has come between us and 
the Truth. Much later on, in one of the latest Upanishads, we find the word 
Maya reappearing, but this time, a transformation has taken place in it, and a 
mass of new meaning has attached itself to the word. Theories had been 
propounded and repeated, others had been taken up, until at last the idea of 
Maya became fixed. We read in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad, "Know nature 
to be Maya and the Ruler of this Maya is the Lord Himself." Coming to our 
philosophers, we find that this word Maya has been manipulated in various 
fashions, until we come to the great Shankaracharya. The theory of Maya was 
manipulated a little by the Buddhists too, but in the hands of the Buddhists it 
became very much like what is called Idealism, and that is the meaning that is 
now generally given to the word Maya. When the Hindu says the world is 
Maya, at once people get the idea that the world is an illusion. This 
interpretation has some basis, as coming through the Buddhistic philosophers. 






because there was one section of philosophers who did not believe in the 
external world at all. But the Maya of the Vedanta, in its last developed form, is 
neither Idealism nor Realism, nor is it a theory. It is a simple statement of facts 
— what we are and what we see around us. 

As I have told you before, the minds of the people from whom the Vedas came 
were intent upon following principles, discovering principles. They had no time 
to work upon details or to wait for them; they wanted to go deep into the heart 
of things. Something beyond was calling them, as it were, and they could not 
wait. Scattered through the Upanishads, we find that the details of subjects 
which we now call modern sciences are often very erroneous, but, at the same 
time, their principles are correct. For instance, the idea of ether, which is one of 
the latest theories of modern science, is to be found in our ancient literature in 
forms much more developed than is the modern scientific theory of ether today, 
but it was in principle. When they tried to demonstrate the workings of that 
principle, they made many mistakes. The theory of the all-pervading life 
principle, of which all life in this universe is but a differing manifestation, was 
understood in Vedic times; it is found in the Brahmanas. There is a long hymn 
in the Samhitas in praise of Prana of which all life is but a manifestation. By 
the by, it may interest some of you to know that there are theories in the Vedic 
philosophy about the origin of life on this earth very similar to those which 
have been advanced by some modern European scientists. You, of course, all 
know that there is a theory that life came from other planets. It is a settled 
doctrine with some Vedic philosophers that life comes in this way from the 
moon. 

Coming to the principles, we find these Vedic thinkers very courageous and 
wonderfully bold in propounding large and generalised theories. Their solution 
of the mystery of the universe, from the external world, was as satisfactory as it 
could be. The detailed workings of modern science do not bring the question 
one step nearer to solution, because the principles have failed. If the theory of 
ether failed in ancient times to give a solution of the mystery of the universe, 
working out the details of that ether theory would not bring us much nearer to 
the truth. If the theory of all-pervading life failed as a theory of this universe, it 
would not mean anything more if worked out in detail, for the details do not 
change the principle of the universe. What I mean is that in their inquiry into 



the principle, the Hindu thinkers were as bold, and in some cases, much bolder 
than the moderns. They made some of the grandest generalizations that have 
yet been reached, and some still remain as theories, which modern science has 
yet to get even as theories. For instance, they not only arrived at the ether 
theory, but went beyond and classified mind also as a still more rarefied ether. 
Beyond that again, they found a still more rarefied ether. Yet that was no 
solution, it did not solve the problem. No amount of knowledge of the external 
world could solve the problem. "But", says the scientist, "we are just beginning 
to know a little: wait a few thousand years and we shall get the solution." "No," 
says the Vedantist, for he has proved beyond all doubt that the mind is limited, 
that it cannot go beyond certain limits — beyond time, space, and causation. As 
no man can jump out of his own self, so no man can go beyond the limits that 
have been put upon him by the laws of time and space. Every attempt to solve 
the laws of causation, time, and space would be futile, because the very attempt 
would have to be made by taking for granted the existence of these three. What 
does the statement of the existence of the world mean, then? "This world has 
no existence." What is meant by that? It means that it has no absolute 
existence. It exists only in relation to my mind, to your mind, and to the mind 
of everyone else. We see this world with the five senses but if we had another 
sense, we would see in it something more. If we had yet another sense, it would 
appear as something still different. It has, therefore, no real existence; it has no 
unchangeable, immovable, infinite existence. Nor can it be called non¬ 
existence, seeing that it exists, and we slave to work in and through it. It is a 
mixture of existence and non-existence. 

Coming from abstractions to the common, everyday details of our lives, we 
find that our whole life is a contradiction, a mixture of existence and non¬ 
existence. There is this contradiction in knowledge. It seems that man can 
know everything, if he only wants to know; but before he has gone a few steps, 
he finds an adamantine wail which he cannot pass. All his work is in a circle, 
and he cannot go beyond that circle. The problems which are nearest and 
dearest to him are impelling him on and calling, day and night, for a solution, 
but he cannot solve them, because he cannot go beyond his intellect. And yet 
that desire is implanted strongly in him. Still we know that the only good is to 
be obtained by controlling and checking it. With every breath, every impulse of 
our heart asks us to be selfish. At the same time, there is some power beyond us 



which says that it is unselfishness alone which is good. Every child is a born 
optimist; he dreams golden dreams. In youth he becomes still more optimistic. 
It is hard for a young man to believe that there is such a thing as death, sueh a 
thing as defeat or degradation. Old age comes, and life is a mass of ruins. 
Dreams have vanished into the air, and the man becomes a pessimist. Thus we 
go from one extreme to another, buffeted by nature, without knowing where we 
are going. It reminds me of a celebrated song in the Lalita Vistara, the 
biography of Buddha. Buddha was born, says the book, as the saviour of 
mankind, but he forgot himself in the luxuries of his palace. Some angels came 
and sang a song to rouse him. And the burden of the whole song is that we are 
floating down the river of life which is continually changing with no stop and 
no rest. So are our lives, going on and on without knowing any rest. What are 
we to do? The man who has enough to eat and drink is an optimist, and he 
avoids all mention of misery, for it frightens him. Tell not to him of the 
sorrows and the sufferings of the world; go to him and tell that it is all good. 
"Yes, I am safe," says he. "Look at me! I have a nice house to live in. I do not 
fear cold and hunger; therefore do not bring these horrible pictures before me." 
But, on the other hand, there are others dying of cold and hunger. If you go and 
teach them that it is all good, they will not hear you. How can they wish others 
to be happy when they are miserable? Thus we are oscillating between 
optimism and pessimism. 

Then, there is the tremendous fact of death. The whole world is going towards 
death; everything dies. All our progress, our vanities, our reforms, our luxuries, 
our wealth, our knowledge, have that one end — death. That is all that is 
certain. Cities come and go, empires rise and fall, planets break into pieces and 
crumble into dust, to be blown about by the atmospheres of other planets. Thus 
it has been going on from time without beginning. Death is the end of 
everything. Death is the end of life, of beauty, of wealth, of power, of virtue 
too. Saints die and sinners die, kings die and beggars die. They are all going to 
death, and yet this tremendous clinging on to life exists. Somehow, we do not 
know why, we cling to life; we cannot give it up. And this is Maya. 

The mother is nursing a child with great care; all her soul, her life, is in that 
child. The child grows, becomes a man, and perchance becomes a blackguard 
and a brute, kicks her and beats her every day; and yet the mother clings to the 



child; and when her reason awakes, she covers it up with the idea of love. She 
little thinks that it is not love, that it is something which has got hold of her 
nerves, which she cannot shake off; however she may try, she cannot shake off 
the bondage she is in. And this is Maya. 

We are all after the Golden Fleece. Every one of us thinks that this will be his. 
Every reasonable man sees that his chance is, perhaps, one in twenty millions, 
yet everyone struggles for it. And this is Maya. 

Death is stalking day and night over this earth of ours, but at the same time we 
think we shall live eternally. A question was once asked of King Yudhishthira, 
"What is the most wonderful thing on this earth?" And the king replied, "Every 
day people are dying around us, and yet men think they will never die." And 
this is Maya. 

These tremendous contradictions in our intellect, in our knowledge, yea, in all 
the facts of our life face us on all sides. A reformer arises and wants to remedy 
the evils that are existing in a certain nation; and before they have been 
remedied, a thousand other evils arise in another place. It is like an old house 
that is falling; you patch it up in one place and the ruin extends to another. In 
India, our reformers cry and preach against the evils of enforced widowhood. 

In the West, non-marriage is the great evil. Help the unmarried on one side; 
they are suffering. Help the widows on the other; they are suffering. It is like 
chronic rheumatism: you drive from the head, and it goes to the body; you 
drive it from there, and it goes to the feet. Reformers arise and preach that 
learning, wealth, and culture should not be in the hands of a select few; and 
they do their best to make them accessible to all. These may bring more 
happiness to some, but, perhaps, as culture comes, physical happiness lessens. 
The knowledge of happiness brings the knowledge of unhappiness. Which way 
then shall we go? The least amount of material prosperity that we enjoy is 
causing the same amount of misery elsewhere. This is the law. The young, 
perhaps, do not see it clearly, but those who have lived long enough and those 
who have struggled enough will understand it. And this is Maya. These things 
are going on, day and night, and to find a solution of this problem is 
impossible. Why should it be so? It is impossible to answer this, because the 
question cannot be logically formulated. There is neither how nor why in fact; 


we only know that it is and that we cannot help it. Even to grasp it, to draw an 
exact image of it in our own mind, is beyond our power. How can we solve it 
then? 

Maya is a statement of the fact of this universe, of how it is going on. People 
generally get frightened when these things are told to them. But bold we must 
be. Hiding facts is not the way to find a remedy. As you all know, a hare 
hunted by dogs puts its head down and thinks itself safe; so, when we run into 
optimism; we do just like the hare, but that is no remedy. There are objections 
against this, but you may remark that they are generally from people who 
possess many of the good things of life. In this country (England) it is very 
difficult to become a pessimist. Everyone tells me how wonderfully the world 
is going on, how progressive; but what he himself is, is his own world. Old 
questions arise: Christianity must be the only true religion of the world because 
Christian nations are prosperous! But that assertion contradicts itself, because 
the prosperity of the Christian nation depends on the misfortune of non- 
Christian nations. There must be some to prey on. Suppose the whole world 
were to become Christian, then the Christian nations would become poor, 
because there would be no non-Christian nations for them to prey upon. Thus 
the argument kills itself. Animals are living upon plants, men upon animals 
and, worst of all, upon one another, the strong upon the weak. This is going on 
everywhere. And this is Maya. What solution do you find for this? We hear 
every day many explanations, and are told that in the long run all will be good. 
Taking it for granted that this is possible, why should there be this diabolical 
way of doing good? Why cannot good be done through good, instead of 
through these diabolical methods? The descendants of the human beings of 
today will be happy; but why must there be all this suffering now? There is no 
solution. This is Maya. 

Again, we often hear that it is one of the features of evolution that it eliminates 
evil, and this evil being continually eliminated from the world, at last only 
good will remain. That is very nice to hear, and it panders to the vanity of those 
who have enough of this world's goods, who have not a hard struggle to face 
every clay and are not being crushed under the wheel of this so-called 
evolution. It is very good and comforting indeed to such fortunate ones. The 
common herd may surfer, but they do not care; let them die, they are of no 


consequence. Very good, yet this argument is fallacious from beginning to end. 
It takes for granted, in the first place, that manifested good and evil in this 
world are two absolute realities. In the second place, it make, at still worse 
assumption that the amount of good is an increasing quantity and the amount of 
evil is a decreasing quantity. So, if evil is being eliminated in this way by what 
they call evolution, there will come a time when all this evil will be eliminated 
and what remains will be all good. Very easy to say, but can it be proved that 
evil is a lessening quantity? Take, for instance, the man who lives in a forest, 
who does not know how to cultivate the mind, cannot read a book, has not 
heard of such a thing as writing. If he is severely wounded, he is soon all right 
again; while we die if we get a scratch. Machines are making things cheap, 
making for progress and evolution, but millions are crushed, that one may 
become rich; while one becomes rich, thousands at the same time become 
poorer and poorer, and whole masses of human beings are made slaves. That 
way it is going on. The animal man lives in the senses. If he does not get 
enough to eat, he is miserable; or if something happens to his body, he is 
miserable. In the senses both his misery and his happiness begin and end. As 
soon as this man progresses, as soon as his horizon of happiness increases, his 
horizon of unhappiness increases proportionately. The man in the forest does 
not know what it is to be jealous, to be in the law courts, to pay taxes, to be 
blamed by society, to be ruled over day and night by the most tremendous 
tyranny that human diabolism ever invented, which pries into the secrets of 
every human heart. He does not know how man becomes a thousand times 
more diabolical than any other animal, with all his vain knowledge and with all 
his pride. Thus it is that, as we emerge out of the senses, we develop higher 
powers of enjoyment, and at the same time we have to develop higher powers 
of suffering too. The nerves become finer and capable off more suffering. In 
every society, we often find that the ignorant, common man, when abused, does 
not feel much, but he feels a good thrashing. But the gentleman cannot bear a 
single word of abuse; he has become so finely nerved. Misery has increased 
with his susceptibility to happiness. This does not go much to prove the 
evolutionist's case. As we increase our power to be happy, we also increase our 
power to suffer, and sometimes I am inclined to think that if we increase our 
power to become happy in arithmetical progression, we shall increase, on the 
other hand, our power to become miserable in geometrical progression. We 
who are progressing know that the more we progress, the more avenues are 


opened to pain as well as to pleasure. And this is Maya. 

Thus we find that Maya is not a theory for the explanation of the world; it is 
simply a statement of facts as they exist, that the very basis of our being is 
contradiction, that everywhere we have to move through this tremendous 
contradiction, that wherever there is good, there must also be evil, and 
wherever there is evil, there must be some good, wherever there is life, death 
must follow as its shadow, and everyone who smiles will have to weep, and 
vice versa. Nor can this state of things be remedied. We may verily imagine 
that there will be a place where there will be only good and no evil, where we 
shall only smile and never weep. This is impossible in the very nature of 
things; for the conditions will remain the same. Wherever there is the power of 
producing a smile in us, there lurks the power of producing tears. Wherever 
there is the power of producing happiness, there lurks somewhere the power of 
making us miserable. 

Thus the Vedanta philosophy is neither optimistic nor pessimistic. It voices 
both these views and takes things as they are. It admits that this world is a 
mixture of good and evil, happiness and misery, and that to increase the one, 
one must of necessity increase the other. There will never be a perfectly good 
or bad world, because the very idea is a contradiction in terms. The great secret 
revealed by this analysis is that good and bad are not two cut-and-dried, 
separate existences. There is not one thing in this world of ours which you can 
label as good and good alone, and there is not one thing in the universe which 
you can label as bad and bad alone. The very same phenomenon which is 
appearing to be good now, may appear to be bad tomorrow. The same thing 
which is producing misery in one, may produce happiness in another. The fire 
that burns the child, may cook a good meal for a starving man. The same 
nerves that carry the sensations of misery carry also the sensations of 
happiness. The only way to stop evil, therefore, is to stop good also; there is no 
other way. To stop death, we shall have to stop life also. Life without death and 
happiness without misery are contradictions, and neither can be found alone, 
because each of them is but a different manifestation of the same thing. What I 
thought to be good yesterday, I do not think to be good now. When I look back 
upon my life and see what were my ideals at different times, I final this to be 
so. At one time my ideal was to drive a strong pair of horses; at another time I 


thought, if I could make a certain kind of sweetmeat, I should be perfectly 
happy; later I imagined that I should be entirely satisfied if I had a wife and 
children and plenty of money. Today I laugh at all these ideals as mere childish 
nonsense. 

The Vedanta says, there must come a time when we shall look back and laugh 
at the ideals which make us afraid of giving up our individuality. Each one of 
us wants to keep this body for an indefinite time, thinking we shall be very 
happy, but there will come a time when we shall laugh at this idea. Now, if 
such be the truth, we are in a state of hopeless contradiction — neither 
existence nor non-existence, neither misery nor happiness, but a mixture of 
them. What, then, is the use of Vedanta and all other philosophies and 
religions? And, above all, what is the use of doing good work? This is a 
question that comes to the mind. If it is true that you cannot do good without 
doing evil, and whenever you try to create happiness there will always be 
misery, people will ask you, "What is the use of doing good?" The answer is in 
the first place, that we must work for lessening misery, for that is the only way 
to make ourselves happy. Every one of us finds it out sooner or later in our 
lives. The bright ones find it out a little earlier, and the dull ones a little later. 
The dull ones pay very dearly for the discovery and the bright ones less dearly. 
In the second place, we must do our part, because that is the only way of 
getting out of this life of contradiction. Both the forces of good and evil will 
keep the universe alive for us, until we awake from our dreams and give up this 
building of mud pies. That lesson we shall have to learn, and it will take a long, 
long time to learn it. 

Attempts have been made in Germany to build a system of philosophy on the 
basis that the Infinite has become the finite. Such attempts are also made in 
England. And the analysis of the position of these philosophers is this, that the 
Infinite is trying to express itself in this universe, and that there will come a 
time when the Infinite will succeed in doing so. It is all very well, and we have 
used the words Infinite and manifestation and expression, and so on, but 
philosophers naturally ask for a logical fundamental basis for the statement that 
the finite can fully express the Infinite. The Absolute and the Infinite can 
become this universe only by limitation. Everything must be limited that comes 
through the senses, or through the mind, or through the intellect; and for the 


limited to be the unlimited is simply absurd and can never be. The Vedanta, on 
the other hand, says that it is true that the Absolute or the Infinite is trying to 
express itself in the finite, but there will come a time when it will find that it is 
impossible, and it will then have to beat a retreat, and this beating a retreat 
means renunciation which is the real beginning of religion. Nowadays it is very 
hard even to talk of renunciation. It was said of me in America that I was a man 
who came out of a land that had been dead and buried for five thousand years, 
and talked of renunciation. So says, perhaps, the English philosopher. Yet it is 
true that that is the only path to religion. Renounce and give up. What did 
Christ say? "He that loseth his life for my sake shall find it." Again and again 
did he preach renunciation as the only way to perfection. There comes a time 
when the mind awakes from this long and dreary dream — the child gives up 
its play and wants to go back to its mother. It finds the truth of the statement, 
"Desire is never satisfied by the enjoyment of desires, it only increases the 
more, as fire, when butter is poured upon it." 

This is true of all sense-enjoyments, of all intellectual enjoyments, and of all 
the enjoyments of which the human mind is capable. They are nothing, they are 
within Maya, within this network beyond which we cannot go. We may run 
therein through infinite time and find no end, and whenever we struggle to get 
a little enjoyment, a mass of misery falls upon us. How awful is this! And when 
I think of it, I cannot but consider that this theory of Maya, this statement that it 
is all Maya, is the best and only explanation. What an amount of misery there is 
in this world; and if you travel among various nations you will find that one 
nation attempts to cure its evils by one means, and another by another. The 
very same evil has been taken up by various races, and attempts have been 
made in various ways to check it, yet no nation has succeeded. If it has been 
minimised at one point, a mass of evil has been crowded at another point. Thus 
it goes. The Hindus, to keep up a high standard of chastity in the race, have 
sanctioned child-marriage, which in the long run has degraded the race. At the 
same time, I cannot deny that this child-marriage makes the race more chaste. 
What would you have? If you want the nation to be more chaste, you weaken 
men and women physically by child-marriage. On the other hand, are you in 
England any better off? No, because chastity is the life of a nation. Do you not 
find in history that the first death-sign of a nation has been unchastity? When 
that has entered, the end of the race is in sight. Where shall we get a solution of 


these miseries then? If parents select husbands and wives for their children, 
then this evil is minimised. The daughters of India are more practical than 
sentimental. But very little of poetry remains in their lives. Again, if people 
select their own husbands and wives, that does not seem to bring much 
happiness. The Indian woman is generally very happy; there are not many 
cases of quarrelling between husband and wife. On the other hand in the United 
States, where the greatest liberty obtains, the number of unhappy homes and 
marriages is large. Unhappiness is here, there, and everywhere. What does it 
show? That, after all, not much happiness has been gained by all these ideals. 
We all struggle for happiness and as soon as we get a little happiness on one 
side, on the other side there comes unhappiness. 

Shall we not work to do good then? Yes, with more zest than ever, but what 
this knowledge will do for us is to break down our fanaticism. The Englishman 
will no more be a fanatic and curse the Hindu. He will learn to respect the 
customs of different nations. There will be less of fanaticism and more of real 
work. Fanatics cannot work, they waste three-fourths of their energy. It is the 
level-headed, calm, practical man who works. So, the power to work will 
increase from this idea. Knowing that this is the state of things, there will be 
more patience. The sight of misery or of evil will not be able to throw us off 
our balance and make us run after shadows. Therefore, patience will come to 
us, knowing that the world will have to go on in its own way. If, for instance, 
all men have become good, the animals will have in the meantime evolved into 
men, and will have to pass through the same state, and so with the plants. But 
only one thing is certain; the mighty river is rushing towards the ocean, and all 
the drops that constitute the stream will in time be drawn into that boundless 
ocean. So, in this life, with all its miseries and sorrows, its joys and smiles and 
tears, one thing is certain, that all things are rushing towards their goal, and it: 
is only a question of time when you and I, and plants and animals, and every 
particles of life that exists must reach the Infinite Ocean of Perfection, must 
attain to Freedom, to God. 

Let me repeat, once more, that the Vedantic position is neither pessimism nor 
optimism. It does not say that this world is all evil or all good. It says that our 
evil is of no less value than our good, and our good of no more value than our 
evil. They are bound together. This is the world, and knowing this, you work 


with patience. What for? Why should we work? If this is the state of things, 
what shall we do? Why not become agnostics? The modern agnostics also 
know there is no solution of this problem, no getting out of this evil of Maya, 
as we say in our language; therefore they tell us to be satisfied and enjoy life. 
Here, again, is a mistake, a tremendous mistake, a most illogical mistake. And 
it is this. What do you mean by life? Do you mean only the life of the senses? 

In this, every one of us differs only slightly from the brutes. I am sure that no 
one is present here whose life is only in the senses. Then, this present life 
means something more than that. Our feelings, thoughts, and aspirations are all 
part and parcel of our life; and is not the struggle towards the area, ideal, 
towards perfection, one of the most important components of what we call life? 
According to the agnostics, we must enjoy life as it is. But this life means, 
above all, this search after the ideal; the essence of life is going towards 
perfection. We must have that, and, therefore, we cannot be agnostics or take 
the world as it appears. The agnostic position takes this life, minus the ideal 
component, to be all that exists. And this, the agnostic claims, cannot be 
reached, therefore he must give up the search. This is what is called Maya — 
this nature, this universe. 

All religions are more or less attempts to get beyond nature — the crudest or 
the most developed, expressed through mythology or symbology, stories of 
gods, angels or demons, or through stories of saints or seers, great men or 
prophets, or through the abstractions of philosophy — all have that one object, 
all are trying to get beyond these limitations. In one word, they are all 
struggling towards freedom. Man feels, consciously or unconsciously, that he is 
bound; he is not what he wants to be. It was taught to him at the very moment 
he began to look around. That very instant he learnt that he was bound, and be 
also found that there was something in him which wanted to fly beyond, where 
the body could not follow, but which was as yet chained down by this 
limitation. Even in the lowest of religious ideas, where departed ancestors and 
other spirits — mostly violent and cruel, lurking about the houses of their 
friends, fond of bloodshed and strong drink — are worshipped, even there we 
find that one common factor, that of freedom. The man who wants to worship 
the gods sees in them, above all things, greater freedom than in himself. If a 
door is closed, he thinks the gods can get through it, and that walls have no 
limitations for them. This idea of freedom increases until it comes to the ideal 




of a Personal God, of which the central concept is that He is a Being beyond 
the limitation of nature, of Maya. I see before me, as it were, that in some of 
those forest retreats this question is being, discussed by those ancient sages of 
India; and in one of them, where even the oldest and the holiest fail to reach the 
solutions a young man stands up in the midst of them, and declares, "Hear, ye 
children of immortality, hear, who live in the highest places, I have found the 
way. By knowing Him who is beyond darkness we can go beyond death." 

This Maya is everywhere. It is terrible. Yet we have to work through it. The 
man who says that he will work when the world has become all good and then 
he will enjoy bliss is as likely to succeed as the man who sits beside the Ganga 
and says, "I will ford the river when all the water has run into the ocean." The 
way is not with Maya, but against it. This is another fact to learn. We are not 
born as helpers of nature, but competitors with nature. We are its bond-masters, 
but we bind ourselves down. Why is this house here? Nature did not build it. 
Nature says, go and live in the forest. Man says, I will build a house and fight 
with nature, and he does so. The whole history of humanity is a continuous 
fight against the so-called laws of nature, and man gains in the end. Coming to 
the internal world, there too the same fight is going on, this fight between the 
animal man and the spiritual man, between light and darkness; and here too 
man becomes victorious. He, as it were, cuts his way out of nature to freedom. 

We see, then, that beyond this Maya the Vedantic philosophers find something 
which is not bound by Maya; and if we can get there, we shall not be bound by 
Maya. This idea is in some form or other the common property of all religions. 
But, with the Vedanta, it is only the beginning of religion and not the end. The 
idea of a Personal God, the Ruler and Creator of this universe, as He has been 
styled, the Ruler of Maya, or nature, is not the end of these Vedantic ideas; it is 
only the beginning. The idea grows and grows until the Vedantist finds that He 
who, he thought, was standing outside, is he himself and is in reality within. He 
is the one who is free, but who through limitation thought he was bound. 


» 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 

« 

CHAPTER IV 

MAYA AND THE EVOLUTION OF THE CONCEPTION OF GOD 

{Delivered in London, 20th October 1896) 

We have seen how the idea of Maya, which forms, as it were, one of the basic 
doctrines of the Advaita Vedanta, is, in its germs, found even in the Samhitas, 
and that in reality all the ideas which are developed in the Upanishads are to be 
found already in the Samhitas in some form or other. Most of you are by this 
time familiar with the idea of Maya, and know that it is sometimes erroneously 
explained as illusion, so that when the universe is said to be Maya, that also has 
to be explained as being illusion. The translation of the word is neither happy 
nor correct. Maya is not a theory; it is simply a statement of facts about the 
universe as it exists, and to understand Maya we must go back to the Samhitas 
and begin with the conception in the germ. 

We have seen how the idea of the Devas came. At the same time we know that 
these Devas were at first only powerful beings, nothing more. Most of you are 
horrified when reading the old scriptures, whether of the Greeks, the Hebrews, 
the Persians, or others, to find that the ancient gods sometimes did things 
which, to us, are very repugnant. But when we read these books, we entirely 
forget that we are persons of the nineteenth century, and these gods were 
beings existing thousands of years ago. We also forget that the people who 
worshipped these gods found nothing incongruous in their characters, found 
nothing to frighten them, because they were very much like themselves. I may 
also remark that that is the one great lesson we have to learn throughout our 
lives. In judging others we always Judge them by our own ideals. That is not as 
it should be. Everyone must be judged according to his own ideal, and not by 
that of anyone else. In our dealings with our fellow-beings we constantly 
labour under this mistake, and I am of opinion that the vast majority of our 
quarrels with one another arise simply from this one cause that we are always 
trying to judge others' gods by our own, others' ideals by our ideals, and others' 
motives by our motives. Under certain circumstances I might do a certain thing, 
and when I see another person taking the same course I think he has also the 






same motive actuating him, little dreaming that although the effect may be the 
same, yet many other causes may produce the same thing. He may have 
performed the action with quite a different motive from that which impelled me 
to do it. So in judging of those ancient religions we must not take the 
standpoint to which we incline, but must put ourselves into the position of 
thought and life of those early times. 

The idea of the cruel and ruthless Jehovah in the Old Testament has frightened 
many — but why? What right have they to assume that the Jehovah of the 
ancient Jews must represent the conventional idea of the God of the present 
day? And at the same time, we must not forget that there will come men after 
us who will laugh at our ideas of religion and God in the same way that we 
laugh at those of the ancients. Yet, through all these various conceptions runs 
the golden thread of unity, and it is the purpose of the Vedanta to discover this 
thread. "I am the thread that runs through all these various ideas, each one of 
which is; like a pearl," says the Lord Krishna; and it is the duty of Vedanta to 
establish this connecting thread, how ever incongruous or disgusting may seem 
these ideas when judged according to the conceptions of today. These ideas, in 
the setting of past times, were harmonious and not more hideous than our 
present ideas. It is only when we try to take them out of their settings and apply 
to our own present circumstances that the hideousness becomes obvious. For 
the old surroundings are dead and gone. Just as the ancient Jew has developed 
into the keen, modern, sharp Jew, and the ancient Aryan into the intellectual 
Hindu similarly Jehovah has grown, and Devas have grown. 

The great mistake is in recognising the evolution of the worshippers, while we 
do not acknowledge the evolution of the Worshipped. He is not credited with 
the advance that his devotees have made. That is to say, you and I, representing 
ideas, have grown; these gods also, as representing ideas, have grown. This 
may seem somewhat curious to you — that God can grow. He cannot. He is 
unchangeable. In the same sense the real man never grows. But man's ideas of 
God are constantly changing and expanding. We shall see later on how the real 
man behind each one of these human manifestations is immovable, 
unchangeable, pure, and always perfect; and in the same way the idea that we 
form of God is a mere manifestation, our own creation. Behind that is the real 
God who never changes, the ever pure, the immutable. But the manifestation is 



always changing revealing the reality behind more and more. When it reveals 
more of the fact behind, it is called progression, when it hides more of the fact 
behind, it is called retrogression. Thus, as we grow, so the gods grow. From the 
ordinary point of view, just as we reveal ourselves as we evolve, so the gods 
reveal themselves. 

We shall now be in a position to understand the theory of Maya. In all the 
regions of the world the one question they propose to discuss is this: Why is 
there disharmony in the universe? Why is there this evil in the universe? We do 
not find this question in the very inception of primitive religious ideas, because 
the world did not appear incongruous to the primitive man. Circumstances were 
not inharmonious for him; there was no dash of opinions; to him there was no 
antagonism of good and evil. There was merely a feeling in his own heart of 
something which said yea, and something which said nay. The primitive man 
was a man of impulse. He did what occurred to him, and tried to bring out 
through his muscles whatever thought came into his mind, and he never 
stopped to judge, and seldom tried to check his impulses. So with the gods, 
they were also creatures of impulse. Indra comes and shatters the forces of the 
demons. Jehovah is pleased with one person and displeased with another, for 
what reason no one knows or asks. The habit of inquiry had not then arisen, 
and whatever he did was regarded as right. There was no idea of good or evil. 
The Devas did many wicked things in our sense of the word; again and again 
Indra and other gods committed very wicked deeds, but to the worshippers of 
Indra the ideas of wickedness and evil did not occur, so they did not question 
them. 

With the advance of ethical ideas came the fight. There arose a certain sense in 
man, called in different languages and nations by different names. Call it the 
voice of God, or the result of past education, or whatever else you like, but the 
effect was this that it had a checking power upon the natural impulses of man. 
There is one impulse in our minds which says, do. Behind it rises another voice 
which says, do not. There is one set of ideas in our mind which is always 
struggling to get outside through the channels of the senses, and behind that, 
although it may be thin and weak, there is an infinitely small voice which says, 
do not go outside. The two beautiful Sanskrit words for these phenomena are 
Pravritti and Nivritti, "circling forward" and "circling inward". It is the circling 


forward which usually governs our actions. Religion begins with this circling 
inward. Religion begins with this "do not". Spirituality begins with this "do 
not". When the "do not" is not there, religion has not begun. And this "do not" 
came, causing men's ideas to grow, despite the fighting gods which they had 
worshipped. 

A little love awoke in the hearts of mankind. It was very small indeed, and 
even now it is not much greater. It was at first confined to a tribe embracing 
perhaps members of the same tribe; these gods loved their tribes and each god 
was a tribal god, the protector of that tribe. And sometimes the members of a 
tribe would think of themselves as the descendants of their god, just as the 
clans in different nations think that they are the common descendants of the 
man who was the founder of the clan. There were in ancient times, and are 
even now, some people who claim to be descendants not only of these tribal 
gods, but also of the Sun and the Moon. You read in the ancient Sanskrit books 
of the great heroic emperors of the solar and the lunar dynasties. They were 
first worshippers of the Sun and the Moon, and gradually came to think of 
themselves as descendants of the god of the Sun of the Moon, and so forth. So 
when these tribal ideas began to grow there came a little love, some slight idea 
of duty towards each other, a little social organisation. Then, naturally, the idea 
came: How can we live together without bearing and forbearing? How can one 
man live with another without having some time or other to check his impulses, 
to restrain himself, to forbear from doing things which his mind would prompt 
him to do? It is impossible. Thus comes the idea of restraint. The whole social 
fabric is based upon that idea of restraint, and we all know that the man or 
woman who has not learnt the great lesson of bearing and forbearing leads a 
most miserable life. 

Now, when these ideas of religion came, a glimpse of something higher, more 
ethical, dawned upon the intellect of mankind. The old gods were found to be 
incongruous — these boisterous, fighting, drinking, beef-eating gods of the 
ancients — whose delight was in the smell of burning flesh and libations of 
strong liquor. Sometimes Indra drank so much that he fell upon the ground and 
talked unintelligibly. These gods could no longer be tolerated. The notion had 
arisen of inquiring into motives, and the gods had to come in for their share of 
inquiry. Reason for such-and-such actions was demanded and the reason was 




wanting. Therefore man gave up these gods, or rather they developed higher 
ideas concerning them. They took a survey, as it were, of all the actions and 
qualities of the gods and discarded those which they could not harmonise, and 
kept those which they could understand, and combined them, labelling them 
with one name, Deva-deva, the God of gods. The god to be worshipped was no 
more a simple symbol of power; something more was required than that. He 
was an ethical god; he loved mankind, and did good to mankind. But the idea 
of god still remained. They increased his ethical significance, and increased 
also his power. He became the most ethical being in the universe, as well as 
almost almighty. 

But all this patchwork would not do. As the explanation assumed greater 
proportions, the difficulty which it sought to solve did the same. If the qualities 
of the god increased in arithmetical progression, the difficulty and doubt 
increased in geometrical progression. The difficulty of Jehovah was very little 
beside the difficulty of the God of the universe, and this question remains to the 
present day. Why under the reign of an almighty and all-loving God of the 
universe should diabolical things be allowed to remain? Why so much more 
misery than happiness, and so much more wickedness than good? We may shut 
our eyes to all these things, but the fact still remains that this world is a hideous 
world. At best, it is the hell of Tantalus. Here we are with strong impulses and 
stronger cravings for sense-enjoyments, but cannot satisfy them. There rises a 
wave which impels us forward in spite of our own will, and as soon as we 
move one step, comes a blow. We are all doomed to live here like Tantalus. 
Ideals come into our head far beyond the limit of our sense-ideals, but when we 
seek to express them, we cannot do so. On the other hand, we are crushed by 
the surging mass around us. Yet if I give up all ideality and merely struggle 
through this world, my existence is that of a brute, and I degenerate and 
degrade myself. Neither way is happiness. Unhappiness is the fate of those who 
are content to live in this world, born as they are. A thousand times greater 
misery is the fate of those who dare to stand forth for truth and for higher 
things and who dare to ask for something higher than mere brute existence 
here. These are facts; but there is no explanation — there cannot be any 
explanation. But the Vedanta shows the way out. You must bear in mind that I 
have to tell you facts that will frighten you sometimes, but if you remember 
what I say, think of it, and digest it, it will be yours, it will raise you higher. 


and make you capable of understanding and living in truth. 

Now, it is a statement of fact that this world is a Tantalus's hell, that we do not 
know anything about this universe, yet at the same time we cannot say that we 
do not know. I cannot say that this chain exists, when I think that I do not know 
it. It may be an entire delusion of my brain. I may be dreaming all the time. I 
am dreaming that I am talking to you, and that you are listening to me. No one 
can prove that it is not a dream. My brain itself may be a dream, and as to that 
no one has ever seen his own brain. We all take it for granted. So it is with 
everything. My own body I take for granted. At the same time I cannot say, I 
do not know. This standing between knowledge and ignorance, this mystic 
twilight, the mingling of truth and falsehood — and where they meet — no one 
knows. We are walking in the midst of a dream, half sleeping, half waking, 
passing all our lives in a haze; this is the fate of everyone of us. This is the fate 
of all sense-knowledge. This is the fate of all philosophy, of all boasted 
science, of all boasted human knowledge. This is the universe. 

What you call matter, or spirit, or mind, or anything else you may like to call 
them, the fact remains the same: we cannot say that they are, we cannot say 
that they are not. We cannot say they are one, we cannot say they are many. 
This eternal play of light and darkness — indiscriminate, indistinguishable, 
inseparable — is always there. A fact, yet at the same time not a fact; awake 
and at the same time asleep. This is a statement of facts, and this is what is 
called Maya. We are born in this Maya, we live in it, we think in it, we dream 
in it. We are philosophers in it, we are spiritual men in it, nay, we are devils in 
this Maya, and we are gods in this Maya. Stretch your ideas as far as you can 
make them higher and higher, call them infinite or by any other name you 
please, even these ideas are within this Maya. It cannot be otherwise, and the 
whole of human knowledge is a generalization of this Maya trying to know it 
as it appears to be. This is the work of Nama-Rupa — name and form. 
Everything that has form, everything that calls up an idea in your mind, is 
within Maya; for everything that is bound by the laws of time, space, and 
causation is within Maya. 

Let us go back a little to those early ideas of God and see what became of them. 
We perceive at once that the idea of some Being who is eternally loving us — 




eternally unselfish and almighty, ruling this universe — could not satisfy. 
"Where is the just, merciful God?" asked the philosopher. Does He not see 
millions and millions of His children perish, in the form of men and animals; 
for who can live one moment here without killing others? Can you draw a 
breath without destroying thousands of lives? You live, because, millions die. 
Every moment of your life, every breath that you breathe, is death to 
thousands; every movement that you make is death to millions. Every morsel 
that you eat is death to millions. Why should they die? There is an old sophism 
that they are very low existences. Supposing they are — which is questionable, 
for who knows whether the ant is greater than the man, or the man than the ant 
— who can prove one way or the other? Apart from that question, even taking 
it for granted that these are very low beings, still why should they die? If they 
are low, they have more reason to live. Why not? Because they live more in the 
senses, they feel pleasure and pain a thousandfold more than you or I can do. 
Which of us eats a dinner with the same gusto as a dog or wolf? None, because 
our energies are not in the senses; they are in the intellect, in the spirit. But in 
animals, their whole soul is in the senses, and they become mad and enjoy 
things which we human beings never dream of, and the pain is commensurate 
with the pleasure. Pleasure and pain are meted out in equal measure. If the 
pleasure felt by animals is so much keener than that felt by man, it follows that 
the animals' sense of pain is as keen, if not keener than man's. So the fact is, the 
pain and misery men feel in dying is intensified a thousandfold in animals, and 
yet we kill them without troubling ourselves about their misery. This is Maya. 
And if we suppose there is a Personal God like a human being, who made 
everything, these so-called explanations and theories which try to prove that 
out of evil comes good are not sufficient. Let twenty thousand good things 
come, but why should they come from evil? On that principle, I might cut the 
throats of others because I want the full pleasure of my five senses. That is no 
reason. Why should good come through evil? The question remains to be 
answered, and it cannot be answered. The philosophy of India was compelled 
to admit this. 

The Vedanta was (and is) the boldest system of religion. It stopped nowhere, 
and it had one advantage. There was no body of priests who sought to suppress 
every man who tried to tell the truth. There was always absolute religious 
freedom. In India the bondage of superstition is a social one; here in the West 




society is very free. Social matters in India are very strict, but religious opinion 
is free. In England a man may dress any way he likes, or eat what he lilies — 
no one objects; but if he misses attending church, then Mrs. Grundy is down on 
him. He has to conform first to what society says on religion, and then he may 
think of the truth. In India, on the other hand, if a man dines with one who does 
not belong to his own caste, down comes society with all its terrible powers 
and crushes him then and there. If he wants to dress a little differently from the 
way in which his ancestor dressed ages ago, he is done for. I have heard of a 
man who was cast out by society because he went several miles to see the first 
railway train. Well, we shall presume that was not true! But in religion, we find 
atheists, materialists, and Buddhists, creeds, opinions, and speculations of 
every phase and variety, some of a most startling character, living side by side. 
Preachers of all sects go about reaching and getting adherents, and at the very 
gates of the temples of gods, the Brahmins — to their credit be it said — allow 
even the materialists to stand and give forth their opinions. 

Buddha died at a ripe old age. I remember a friend of mine, a great American 
scientist, who was fond of reading his life. He did not like the death of Buddha, 
because he was not crucified. What a false idea! For a man to be great he must 
be murdered! Such ideas never prevailed in India. This great Buddha travelled 
all over India, denouncing her gods and even the God of the universe, and yet 
he lived to a good old age. For eighty years he lived, and had converted half the 
country. 

Then, there were the Charvakas, who preached horrible things, the most rank, 
undisguised materialism, such as in the nineteenth century they dare not openly 
preach. These Charvakas were allowed to preach from temple to temple, and 
city to city, that religion was all nonsense, that it was priestcraft, that the Vedas 
were the words and writings of fools, rogues, and demons, and that there was 
neither God nor an eternal soul. If there was a soul, why did it not come back 
after death drawn by the love of wife and child. Their idea was that if there was 
a soul it must still love after death, and want good things to eat and nice dress. 
Yet no one hurt these Charvakas. 

Thus India has always had this magnificent idea of religious freedom, and you 
must remember that freedom is the first condition of growth. What you do not 





make free, will never grow. The idea that you can make others grow and help 
their growth, that you can direct and guide them, always retaining for yourself 
the freedom of the teacher, is nonsense, a dangerous lie which has retarded the 
growth of millions and millions of human beings in this world. Let men have 
the light of liberty. That is the only condition of growth. 

We, in India, allowed liberty in spiritual matters, and we have a tremendous 
spiritual power in religious thought even today. You grant the same liberty in 
social matters, and so have a splendid social organisation. We have not given 
any freedom to the expansion of social matters, and ours is a cramped society. 
You have never given any freedom in religious matters but with fire and sword 
have enforced your beliefs, and the result is that religion is a stunted, 
degenerated growth in the European mind. In India, we have to take off the 
shackles from society; in Europe, the chains must be taken from the feet of 
spiritual progress. Then will come a wonderful growth and development of 
man. If we discover that there is one unity running through all these 
developments, spiritual, moral, and social, we shall find that religion, in the 
fullest sense of the word, must come into society, and into our everyday life. In 
the light of Vedanta you will Understand that all sciences are but 
manifestations of religion, and so is everything that exists in this world. 

We see, then, that through freedom the sciences were built; and in them we 
have two sets of opinions, the one the materialistic and denouncing, and the 
other the positive and constructive. It is a most curious fact that in every 
society you find them. Supposing there is an evil in society, you will find 
immediately one group rise up and denounce it in vindictive fashion, which 
sometimes degenerates into fanaticism. There are fanatics in every society, and 
women frequently join in these outcries, because of their impulsive nature. 
Every fanatic who gets up and denounces something can secure a following. It 
is very easy to break down; a maniac can break anything he likes, but it would 
be hard for him to build up anything. These fanatics may do some good, 
according to their light, but much morn harm. Because social institutions are 
not made in a day, and to change them means removing the cause. Suppose 
there is an evil; denouncing it will not remove it, but you must go to work at 
the root. Eirst find out the c abuse, then remove it, and the effect will be 
removed also. Mere outcry not produce any effect, unless indeed it produces 


misfortune. 


There are others who had sympathy in their hearts and who understood the idea 
that we must go deep into the cause, these were the great saints. One fact you 
must remember, that all the great teachers of the world have declared that they 
came not to destroy but to fulfil. Many times his has not been understood, and 
their forbearance has been thought to be an unworthy compromise with 
existing popular opinions. Even now, you occasionally hear that these prophets 
and great teachers were rather cowardly, and dared not say and do what they 
thought was right; but that was not so. Fanatics little understand the infinite 
power of love in the hearts of these great sages who looked upon the 
inhabitants of this world as their children. They were the real fathers, the real 
gods, filled with infinite sympathy and patience for everyone; they were ready 
to bear and forbear. They knew how human society should grow, and patiently 
slowly, surely, went on applying their remedies, not by denouncing and 
frightening people, but by gently and kindly leading them upwards step by step. 
Such were the writers of the Upanishads. They knew full well how the old 
ideas of God were not reconcilable with the advanced ethical ideas of the time; 
they knew full well that what the atheists were preaching contained a good deal 
of truth, nay, great nuggets of truth; but at the same time, they understood that 
those who wished to sever the thread that bound the beads, who wanted to 
build a new society in the air, would entirely fail. 

We never build anew, we simply change places; we cannot have anything new, 
we only change the position of things. The seed grows into the tree, patiently 
and gently; we must direct our energies towards the truth and fulfil the truth 
that exists, not try to make new truths. Thus, instead of denouncing these old 
ideas of God as unfit for modern times, the ancient sages began to seek out the 
reality that was in them. The result was the Vedanta philosophy, and out of the 
old deities, out of the monotheistic God, the Ruler of the universe, they found 
yet higher and higher ideas in what is called the Impersonal Absolute; they 
found oneness throughout the universe. 

He who sees in this world of manifoldness that One running through all, in this 
world of death he who finds that One Infinite Life, and in this world of 
insentience and ignorance he who finds that One Light and Knowledge, unto 


him belongs eternal peace. Unto none else, unto none else. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER V 
MAYA AND FREEDOM 

{Delivered in London, 22nd October 1896) 

"Trailing clouds of glory we come," says the poet. Not all of us come as 
trailing clouds of glory however; some of us come as trailing black fogs; there 
can be no question about that. But every one of us comes into this world to 
fight, as on a battlefield. We come here weeping to fight our way, as well as we 
can, and to make a path for ourselves through this infinite ocean of life; 
forward we go, having long ages behind us and an immense expanse beyond. 

So on we go, till death comes and takes us off the field — victorious or 
defeated, we do not know. And this is Maya. 

Hope is dominant in the heart of childhood. The whole world is a golden vision 
to the opening eyes of the child; he thinks his will is supreme. As he moves 
onward, at every step nature stands as an adamantine wall, barring his future 
progress. He may hurl himself against it again and again, striving to break 
through. The further he goes, the further recedes the ideal, till death comes, and 
there is release, perhaps. And this is Maya. 

A man of science rises, he is thirsting after knowledge. No sacrifice is too 
great, no struggle too hopeless for him. He moves onward discovering secret 
after secret of nature, searching out the secrets from her innermost heart, and 
what for? What is it all for? Why should we give him glory? Why should he 
acquire fame? Does not nature do infinitely more than any human being can 
do? — and nature is dull, insentient. Why should it be glory to imitate the dull, 
the insentient? Nature can hurl a thunderbolt of any magnitude to any distance. 
If a man can do one small part as much, we praise him and laud him to the 
skies. Why? Why should we praise him for imitating nature, imitating death, 
imitating dullness imitating insentience? The force of gravitation can pull to 
pieces the biggest mass that ever existed; yet it is insentient. What glory is 
there in imitating the insentient? Yet we are all struggling after that. And this is 
maya. 








The senses drag the human soul out. Man is seeking for pleasure and for 
happiness where it can never be found. For countless ages we are all taught that 
this is futile and vain, there is no happiness here. But we cannot learn; it is 
impossible for us to do so, except through our own experiences. We try them, 
and a blow comes. Do we learn then? Not even then. Like moths hurling 
themselves against the flame, we are hurling ourselves again and again into 
sense-pleasures, hoping to find satisfaction there. We return again and again 
with freshened energy; thus we go on, till crippled and cheated we die. And this 
is Maya. 

So with our intellect. In our desire to solve the mysteries of the universe, we 
cannot stop our questioning, we feel we must know and cannot believe that no 
knowledge is to be gained. A few steps, and there arises the wall of 
beginningless and endless time which we cannot surmount. A few steps, and 
there appears a wall of boundless space which cannot be surmounted, and the 
whole is irrevocably bound in by the walls of cause and effect. We cannot go 
beyond them. Yet we struggle, and still have to struggle. And this is Maya. 

With every breath, with every pulsation of the heart with every one of our 
movements, we think we are free, and the very same moment we are shown 
that we are not. Bound slaves, nature's bond-slaves, in body, in mind, in all our 
thoughts, in all our feelings. And this is Maya. 

There was never a mother who did not think her child was a born genius, the 
most extraordinary child that was ever born; she dotes upon her child. Her 
whole soul is in the child. The child grows up, perhaps becomes a drunkard, a 
brute, ill-treats the mother, and the more he ill-treats her, the more her love 
increases. The world lauds it as the unselfish love of the mother, little dreaming 
that the mother is a born slave, she cannot help it. She would a thousand times 
rather throw off the burden, but she cannot. So she covers it with a mass of 
flowers, which she calls wonderful love. And this is Maya. 

We are all like this in the world. A legend tells how once Narada said to 
Krishna, "Lord, show me Maya." A few days passed away, and Krishna asked 
Narada to make a trip with him towards a desert, and after walking for several 
miles, Krishna said, "Narada, I am thirsty; can you fetch some water for me?" 


"I will go at once, sir, and get you water." So Narada went. At a little distance 
there was a village; he entered the village in search of water and knocked at a 
door, which was opened by a most beautiful young girl. At the sight of her he 
immediately forgot that his Master was waiting for water, perhaps dying for the 
want of it. He forgot everything and began to talk with the girl. All that day he 
did not return to his Master. The next day, he was again at the house, talking to 
the girl. That talk ripened into love; he asked the father for the daughter, and 
they were married and lived there and had children. Thus twelve years passed. 
His father-in-law died, he inherited his property. He lived, as he seemed to 
think, a very happy life with his wife and children, his fields and his cattle, and 
so forth. Then came a flood. One night the river rose until it overflowed its 
banks and flooded the whole village. Houses fell, men and animals were swept 
away and drowned, and everything was floating in the rush of the stream. 
Narada had to escape. With one hand be held his wife, and with the other two 
of his children; another child was on his shoulders, and he was trying to ford 
this tremendous flood. After a few steps he found the current was too strong, 
and the child on his shoulders fell and was borne away. A cry of despair came 
from Narada. In trying to save that child, he lost his grasp upon one of the 
others, and it also was lost. At last his wife, whom he clasped with all his 
might, was torn away by the current, and he was thrown on the bank, weeping 
and wailing in bitter lamentation. Behind him there came a gentle voice, "My 
child, where is the water? You went to fetch a pitcher of water, and I am 
waiting for you; you have been gone for quite half an hour." "Half an hour! " 
Narada exclaimed. Twelve whole years had passed through his mind, and all 
these scenes had happened in half an hour! And this is Maya. 

In one form or another, we are all in it. It is a most difficult and intricate state 
of things to understand. It has been preached in every country, taught 
everywhere, but only believed in by a few, because until we get the experiences 
ourselves we cannot believe in it. What does it show? Something very terrible. 
For it is all futile. Time, the avenger of everything, comes, and nothing is left. 
He swallows up the saint and the sinner, the king and the peasant, the beautiful 
and the ugly; he leaves nothing. Everything is rushing towards that one goal 
destruction. Our knowledge, our arts, our sciences, everything is rushing 
towards it. None can stem the tide, none can hold it back for a minute. We may 
try to forget it, in the same way that persons in a plague-striker city try to create 


oblivion by drinking, dancing, and other vain attempts, and so becoming 
paralysed. So we are trying to forget, trying to create oblivion by all sorts of 
sense-pleasures. And this is Maya. 

Two ways have been proposed. One method, which everyone knows, is very 
common, and that is: "It may be very true, but do not think of it. 'Make hay 
while the sun shines,' as the proverb says. It is all true, it is a fact, but do not 
mind it. Seize the few pleasures you can, do what little you can, do not look at 
tile dark side of the picture, but always towards the hopeful, the positive side." 
There is some truth in this, but there is also a danger. The truth is that it is a 
good motive power. Hope and a positive ideal are very good motive powers for 
our lives, but there is a certain danger in them. The danger lies in our giving up 
the struggle in despair. Such is the case with those who preach, "Take the 
world as it is, sit down as calmly and comfortably as you can and be contented 
with all these miseries. When you receive blows, say they are not blows but 
flowers; and when you are driven about like slaves, say that you are free. Day 
and night tell lies to others and to your own souls, because that is the only way 
to live happily." This is what is called practical wisdom, and never was it more 
prevalent in the world than in this nineteenth century; because never were 
harder blows hit than at the present time, never was competition keener, never 
were men so cruel to their fellow-men as now; and, therefore, must this 
consolation be offered. It is put forward in the strongest way at the present 
time; but it fails, as it always must fail. We cannot hide a carrion with roses; it 
is impossible. It would not avail long; for soon the roses would fade, and the 
carrion would be worse than ever before. So with our lives. We may try to 
cover our old and festering sores with cloth of gold, but there comes a day 
when the cloth of gold is removed, and the sore in all its ugliness is revealed. 

Is there no hope then? True it is that we are all slaves of Maya, born in Maya, 
and live in Maya. Is there then no way out, no hope? That we are all miserable, 
that this world is really a prison, that even our so-called trailing beauty is but a 
prison-house, and that even our intellects and minds are prison-houses, have 
been known for ages upon ages. There has never been a man, there has never 
been a human soul, who has not felt this sometime or other, however he may 
talk. And the old people feel it most, because in them is the accumulated 
experience of a whole life, because they cannot be easily cheated by the lies of 


nature. Is there no way out? We find that with all this, with this terrible fact 
before us, in the midst of sorrow and suffering, even in this world where life 
and death are synonymous, even here, there is a still small voice that is ringing 
through all ages, through every country, and in every heart: "This My Maya is 
divine, made up of qualities, and very difficult to cross. Yet those that come 
unto Me, cross the river of life." "Come unto Me all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden and I will give you rest." This is the voice that is leading us 
forward. Man has heard it, and is hearing it all through the ages. This voice 
comes to men when everything seems to be lost and hope has fled, when man's 
dependence on his own strength has been crushed down and everything seems 
to melt away between his fingers, and life is a hopeless ruin. Then he hears it. 
This is called religion. 

On the one side, therefore, is the bold assertion that this is all nonsense, that 
this is Maya, but along with it there is the most hopeful assertion that beyond 
Maya, there is a way out. On the other hand, practical men tell us, "Don't 
bother your heads about such nonsense as religion and metaphysics. Live here; 
this is a very bad world indeed, but make the best of it." Which put in plain 
language means, live a hypocritical, lying life, a life of continuous fraud, 
covering all sores in the best way you can. Go on putting patch after patch, 
until everything is lost, and you are a mass of patchwork. This is what is called 
practical life. Those that are satisfied with this patchwork will never come to 
religion. Religion begins with a tremendous dissatisfaction with the present 
state of things, with our lives, and a hatred, an intense hatred, for this patching 
up of life, an unbounded disgust for fraud and lies. He alone can be religious 
who dares say, as the mighty Buddha once said under the Bo-tree, when this 
idea of practicality appeared before him and he saw that it was nonsense, and 
yet could not find a way out. When the temptation came to him to give up his 
search after truth, to go back to the world and live the old life of fraud, calling 
things by wrong names, telling lies to oneself and to everybody, he, the giant, 
conquered it and said, "Death is better than a vegetating ignorant life; it is 
better to die on the battle-field than to live a life of defeat." This is the basis of 
religion. When a man takes this stand, he is on the way to find the truth, he is 
on the way to God. That determination must be the first impulse towards 
becoming religious. I will hew out a way for myself. I will know the truth or 
give up my life in the attempt. For on this side it is nothing, it is gone, it is 


vanishing every day. The beautiful, hopeful, young person of today is the 
veteran of tomorrow. Hopes and joys and pleasures will die like blossoms with 
tomorrow's frost. That is one side; on the other, there are the great charms of 
conquest, victories over all the ills of life, victory over life itself, the conquest 
of the universe. On that side men can stand. Those who dare, therefore, to 
struggle for victory, for truth, for religion, are in the right way; and that is what 
the Vedas preach: Be not in despair, the way is very difficult, like walking on 
the edge of a razor; yet despair not, arise, awake, and find the ideal, the goal. 

Now all these various manifestations of religion, in whatever shape and form 
they have come to mankind, have this one common central basis. It is the 
preaching of freedom, the way out of this world. They never came to reconcile 
the world and religion, but to cut the Gordian knot, to establish religion in its 
own ideal, and not to compromise with the world. That is what every religion 
preaches, and the duty of the Vedanta is to harmonise all these aspirations, to 
make manifest the common ground between all the religions of the world, the 
highest as well as the lowest. What we call the most arrant superstition and the 
highest philosophy really have a common aim in that they both try to show the 
way out of the same difficulty, and in most cases this way is through the help 
of someone who is not himself bound by the laws of nature in one word, 
someone who is free. In spite of all the difficulties and differences of opinion 
about the nature of the one free agent, whether he is a Personal God, or a 
sentient being like man, whether masculine, feminine, or neuter — and the 
discussions have been endless — the fundamental idea is the same. In spite of 
the almost hopeless contradictions of the different systems, we find the golden 
thread of unity running through them all, and in this philosophy, this golden 
thread has been traced revealed little by little to our view, and the first step to 
this revelation is the common ground that all are advancing towards freedom. 

One curious fact present in the midst of all our joys and sorrows, difficulties 
and struggles, is that we are surely journeying towards freedom. The question 
was practically this: "What is this universe? From what does it arise? Into what 
does it go?" And the answer was: "In freedom it rises, in freedom it rests, and 
into freedom it melts away." This idea of freedom you 
cannot relinquish. Your actions, your very lives will be lost without it. Every 
moment nature is proving us to be slaves and not free. Yet, simultaneously 


rises the other idea, that still we are free At every step we are knocked down, as 
it were, by Maya, and shown that we are bound; and yet at the same moment, 
together with this blow, together with this feeling that we are bound, comes the 
other feeling that we are free. Some inner voice tells us that we are free. But if 
we attempt to realise that freedom, to make it manifest, we find the difficulties 
almost insuperable Yet, in spite of that it insists on asserting itself inwardly, "I 
am free, I am free." And if you study all the various religions of the world you 
will find this idea expressed. Not only religion — you must not take this word 
in its narrow sense — but the whole life of society is the assertion of that one 
principle of freedom. All movements are the assertion of that one freedom. 

That voice has been heard by everyone, whether he knows it or not, that voice 
which declares, "Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden." It may 
not be in the same language or the same form of speech, but in some form or 
other, that voice calling for freedom has been with us. Yes, we are born here on 
account of that voice; every one of our movements is for that. We are all 
rushing towards freedom, we are all following that voice, whether we know it 
or not; as the children of the village were attracted by the music of the flute- 
player, so we are all following the music of the voice without knowing it. 

We are ethical when we follow that voice. Not only the human soul, but all 
creatures, from the lowest to the highest have heard the voice and are rushing 
towards it; and in the struggle are either combining with each other or pushing 
each other out of the way. Thus come competition, joys, struggles, life, 
pleasure, and death, and the whole universe is nothing but the result of this mad 
struggle to reach the voice. This is the manifestation of nature. 

What happens then? The scene begins to shift. As soon as you know the voice 
and understand what it is, the whole scene changes. The same world which was 
the ghastly battle-field of Maya is now changed into something good and 
beautiful. We no longer curse nature, nor say that the world is horrible and that 
it is all vain; we need no longer weep and wail. As soon as we understand the 
voice, we see the reassert why this struggle should be here, this fight, this 
competition, this difficulty, this cruelty, these little pleasures and joys; we see 
that they are in the nature of things, because without them there would be no 
going towards the voice, to attain which we are destined, whether we know it 
or not. All human life, all nature, therefore, is struggling to attain to freedom. 



The sun is moving towards the goal, so is the earth in circling round the sun, so 
is the moon in circling round the earth. To that goal the planet is moving, and 
the air is blowing. Everything is struggling towards that. The saint is going 
towards that voice — he cannot help it, it is no glory to him. So is the sinner. 
The charitable man is going straight towards that voice, and cannot be 
hindered; the miser is also going towards the same destination: the greatest 
worker of good hears the same voice within, and he cannot resist it, he must go 
towards the voice; so with the most arrant idler. One stumbles more than 
another, and him who stumbles more we call bad, him who stumbles less we 
call good. Good and bad are never two different things, they are one and the 
same; the difference is not one of kind, but of degree. 

Now, if the manifestation of this power of freedom is really governing the 
whole universe — applying that to religion, our special study — we find this 
idea has been the one assertion throughout. Take the lowest form of religion 
where there is the worship of departed ancestors or certain powerful and cruel 
gods; what is the prominent idea about the gods or departed ancestors? That 
they are superior to nature, not bound by its restrictions. The worshipper has, 
no doubt, very limited ideas of nature. He himself cannot pass through a wall, 
nor fly up into the skies, but the gods whom he worships can do these things. 
What is meant by that, philosophically? That the assertion of freedom is there, 
that the gods whom he worships are superior to nature as he knows it. So with 
those who worship still higher beings. As the idea of nature expands, the idea 
of the soul which is superior to nature also expands, until we come to what we 
call monotheism, which holds that there is Maya (nature), and that there is 
some Being who is the Ruler of this Maya. 

Here Vedanta begins, where these monotheistic ideas first appear. But the 
Vedanta philosophy wants further explanation. This explanation — that there is 
a Being beyond all these manifestations of Maya, who is superior to and 
independent of Maya, and who is attracting us towards Himself, and that we 
are all going towards Him — is very good, says the Vedanta, but yet the 
perception is not clear, the vision is dim and hazy, although it does not directly 
contradict reason. Just as in your hymn it is said, "Nearer my God to Thee," the 
same hymn would be very good to the Vedantin, only he would change a word, 
and make it, "Nearer my God to me." The idea that the goal is far off, far 



beyond nature, attracting us all towards it, has to be brought nearer and nearer, 
without degrading or degenerating it. The God of heaven becomes the God in 
nature, and the God in nature becomes the God who is nature, and the God who 
is nature becomes the God within this temple of the body, and the God 
dwelling in the temple of the body at last becomes the temple itself, becomes 
the soul and man — and there it reaches the last words it can teach. He whom 
the sages have been seeking in all these places is in our own hearts; the voice 
that you heard was right, says the Vedanta, but the direction you gave to the 
voice was wrong. That ideal of freedom that you perceived was correct, but 
you projected it outside yourself, and that was your mistake. Bring it nearer and 
nearer, until you find that it was all the time within you, it was the Self of your 
own self. That freedom was your own nature, and this Maya never bound you. 
Nature never has power over you. Like a frightened child you were dreaming 
that it was throttling you, and the release from this fear is the goal: not only to 
see it intellectually, but to perceive it, actualise it, much more definitely than 
we perceive this world. Then we shall know that we are free. Then, and then 
alone, will all difficulties vanish, then will all the perplexities of heart be 
smoothed away, all crookedness made straight, then will vanish the delusion of 
manifoldness and nature; and Maya instead of being a horrible, hopeless 
dream, as it is now will become beautiful, and this earth, instead of being a 
prison-house, will become our playground, and even dangers and difficulties, 
even all sufferings, will become deified and show us their real nature, will 
show us that behind everything, as the substance of everything. He is standing, 
and that He is the one real Self. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VI 

THE ABSOLUTE AND MANIFESTATION 

{Delivered in London, 1896) 

The one question that is most difficult to grasp in understanding the Advaita 
philosophy, and the one question that will be asked again and again and that 
will always remain is: How has the Infinite, the Absolute, become the finite? I 
will now take up this question, and, in order to illustrate it, I will use a figure. 
Here is the Absolute (a), and this is the universe (b). The Absolute has become 

the universe. By this is not only meant the material 
world, but the mental world, the spiritual world — 
heavens and earths, and in fact, everything that exists. 
Mind is the name of a change, and body the name of 
another change, and so on, and all these changes 
compose our universe. This Absolute {a) has become 
the universe {b) by coming through time, space, and causation (c). This is the 
central idea of Advaita. Time, space, and causation are like the glass through 
which the Absolute is seen, and when It is seen on the lower side. It appears as 
the universe. Now we at once gather from this that in the Absolute there is 
neither time, space, nor causation. The idea of time cannot be there, seeing that 
there is no mind, no thought. The idea of space cannot be there, seeing that 
there is no external change. What you call motion and causation cannot exist 
where there is only One. We have to understand this, and impress it on our 
minds, that what we call causation begins after, if we may be permitted to say 
so, the degeneration of the Absolute into the phenomenal, and not before; that 
our will, our desire and all these things always come after that. I think 
Schopenhauer's philosophy makes a mistake in its interpretation of Vedanta, 
for it seeks to make the will everything. Schopenhauer makes the will stand in 
the place of the Absolute. But the absolute cannot be presented as will, for will 
is something changeable and phenomenal, and over the line, drawn above time, 
space, and causation, there is no change, no motion; it is only below the line 
that external motion and internal motion, called thought begin. There can be no 
will on the other side, and will therefore, cannot be the cause of this universe. 


(aI The Absaittfe 
Ic) 

lime 

Space 

Caiisairion 

The i'niTtrse 











Coming nearer, we see in our own bodies that will is not the cause of every 
movement. I move this chair; my will is the cause of this movement, and this 
will becomes manifested as muscular motion at the other end. But the same 
power that moves the chair is moving the heart, the lungs, and so on, but not 
through will. Given that the power is the same, it only becomes will when it 
rises to the plane of consciousness, and to call it will before it has risen to this 
plane is a misnomer. This makes a good deal of confusion in Schopenhauer's 
philosophy. 

A stone falls and we ask, why? This question is possible only on the 
supposition that nothing happens without a cause. I request you to make this 
very clear in your minds, for whenever we ask why anything happens, we are 
taking for granted that everything that happens must have a why, that is to say, 
it must have been preceded by something else which acted as the cause. This 
precedence and succession are what we call the law of causation. It means that 
everything in the universe is by turn a cause and an effect. It is the cause of 
certain things which come after it, and is itself the effect of something else 
which has preceded it. This is called the law of causation and is a necessary 
condition of all our thinking. We believe that every particle in the universe, 
whatever it be, is in relation to every other particle. There has been much 
discussion as to how this idea arose. In Europe, there have been intuitive 
philosophers who believed that it was constitutional in humanity, others have 
believed it came from experience, but the question has never been settled. We 
shall see later on what the Vedanta has to say about it. But first we have to 
understand this that the very asking of the question "why" presupposes that 
everything round us has been preceded by certain things and will be succeeded 
by certain other things. The other belief involved in this question is that nothing 
in the universe is independent, that everything is acted upon by something 
outside itself. Interdependence is the law of the whole universe. In asking what 
caused the Absolute, what an error we are making! To ask this question we 
have to suppose that the Absolute also is bound by something, that It is 
dependent on something; and in making this supposition, we drag the Absolute 
down to the level of the universe. For in the Absolute there is neither time, 
space, nor causation; It is all one. That which exists by itself alone cannot have 
any cause. That which is free cannot have any cause; else it would not be free, 
but bound. That which has relativity cannot be free. Thus we see the very 


question, why the Infinite became the finite, is an impossible one, for it is self¬ 
contradictory. Coming from subtleties to the logic of our common plane, to 
common sense, we can see this from another side, when we seek to know how 
the Absolute has become the relative. Supposing we knew the answer, would 
the Absolute remain the Absolute? It would have become relative. What is 
meant by knowledge in our common-sense idea? It is only something that has 
become limited by our mind, that we know, and when it is beyond our mind, it 
is not knowledge. Now if the Absolute becomes limited by the mind. It is no 
more Absolute; It has become finite. Everything limited by the mind becomes 
finite. Therefore to know the Absolute is again a contradiction in terms. That is 
why this question has never been answered, because if it were answered, there 
would no more be an Absolute. A God known is no more God; He has become 
finite like one of us. He cannot be known He is always he Unknowable One. 

But what Advaita says is that God is more than knowable. This is a great fact to 
learn. You must not go home with the idea that God is unknowable in the sense 
in which agnostics put it. For instance, here is a chair, it is known to us. But 
what is beyond ether or whether people exist there or not is possibly 
unknowable. But God is neither known nor unknowable in this sense. He is 
something still higher than known; that is what is meant by God being 
unknown and unknowable. The expression is not used in the sense in which it 
may be said that some questions are unknown ant unknowable. God is more 
than known. This chair is known, but God is intensely more than that because 
in and through Him we have to know this chair itself. He is the Witness, the 
eternal Witness of all knowledge. Whatever we know we have to know in and 
through Him. He is the Essence of our own Self. He is the Essence of this ego, 
this I and we cannot know anything excepting in and through that I. Therefore 
you have to know everything in and through the Brahman. To know the chair 
you have to know it in and through God. Thus God is infinitely nearer to us 
than the chair, but yet He is infinitely higher. Neither known, nor unknown, but 
something infinitely higher than either. He is your Self. "Who would live a 
second, who would breathe a second in this universe, if that Blessed One were 
not filling it?" Because in and through Him we breathe, in and through Him we 
exist. Not the He is standing somewhere and making my blood circulate. What 
is meant is that He is the Essence of all this, tie Soul of my soul. You cannot by 
any possibility say you know Him; it would be degrading Him. You cannot get 


out of yourself, so you cannot know Him. Knowledge is objectification. For 
instance, in memory you are objectifying many things, projecting them out of 
yourself. All memory, all the things which I have seen and which I know are in 
my mind. The pictures, the impressions of all these things, are in my mind, and 
when I would try to think of them, to know them, the first act of knowledge 
would be to project them outside. This cannot be done with God, because He is 
the Essence of our souls, we cannot project Him outside ourselves. Here is one 
of the profoundest passages in Vedanta: "He that is the Essence of your soul. 
He is the Truth, He is the Self, thou art That, O Shvetaketu." This is what is 
meant by "Thou art God." You cannot describe Him by any other language. All 
attempts of language, calling Him father, or brother, or our dearest friend, are 
attempts to objectify God, which cannot be done. He is the Eternal Subject of 
everything. I am the subject of this chair; I see the chair; so God is the Eternal 
Subject of my soul. How can you objectify Him, the Essence of your souls, the 
Reality of everything? Thus, I would repeat to you once more, God is neither 
knowable nor unknowable, but something infinitely higher than either. He is 
one with us, and that which is one with us is neither knowable nor unknowable, 
as our own self. You cannot know your own self; you cannot move it out and 
make it an object to look at, because you are that and cannot separate yourself 
from it. Neither is it unknowable, for what is better known than yourself? It is 
really the centre of our knowledge. In exactly the same sense, God is neither 
unknowable nor known, but infinitely higher than both; for He is our real Self. 

Eirst, we see then that the question, "What caused the Absolute?" is a 
contradiction in terms; and secondly, we find that the idea of God in the 
Advaita is this Oneness; and, therefore, we cannot objectify Him, for we are 
always living and moving in Him, whether we know it or not. Whatever we do 
is always through Him. Now the question is: What are time, space, and 
causation? Advaita means non-duality; there are no two, but one. Yet we see 
that here is a proposition that the Absolute is manifesting Itself as many, 
through the veil of time, space, and causation. Therefore it seems that here are 
two, the Absolute and Maya (the sum total of time, space, and causation). It 
seems apparently very convincing that there are two. To this the Advaitist 
replies that it cannot be called two. To have two, we must have two absolute 
independent existences which cannot be caused. In the first place time, space, 
and causation cannot be said to be independent existences. Time is entirely a 


dependent existence; it changes with every change of our mind. Sometimes in 
dream one imagines that one has lived several years, at other times several 
months were passed as one second. So, time is entirely dependent on our state 
of mind. Secondly, the idea of time vanishes altogether, sometimes. So with 
space. We cannot know what space is. Yet it is there, indefinable, and cannot 
exist separate from anything else. So with causation. 

The one peculiar attribute we find in time, space, and causation is that they 
cannot exist separate from other things. Try to think of space without colour, or 
limits, or any connection with the things around — just abstract space. You 
cannot; you have to think of it as the space between two limits or between three 
objects. It has to be connected with some object to have any existence. So with 
time; you cannot have any idea of abstract time, but you have to take two 
events, one preceding and the other succeeding, and join the two events by the 
idea of succession. Time depends on two events, just as space has to be related 
to outside objects. And the idea of causation is inseparable from time and 
space. This is the peculiar thing about them that they have no independent 
existence. They have not even the existence which the chair or the wall has. 
They are as shadows around everything which you cannot catch. They have no 
real existence; yet they are not non-existent, seeing that through them all things 
are manifesting as this universe. Thus we see, first, that the combination of 
time, space, and causation has neither existence nor non-existence. Secondly, it 
sometimes vanishes. To give an illustration, there is a wave on the ocean. The 
wave is the same as the ocean certainly, and yet we know it is a wave, and as 
such different from the ocean. What makes this difference? The name and the 
form, that is, the idea in the mind and the form. Now, can we think of a wave¬ 
form as something separate from the ocean? Certainly not. It is always 
associated with the ocean idea. If the wave subsides, the form vanishes in a 
moment, and yet the form was not a delusion. So long as the wave existed the 
form was there, and you were bound to see the form. This is Maya. 

The whole of this universe, therefore, is, as it were, a peculiar form; the 
Absolute is that ocean while you and I, and suns and stars, and everything else 
are various waves of that ocean. And what makes the waves different? Only the 
form, and that form is time, space, and causation, all entirely dependent on the 
wave. As soon as the wave goes, they vanish. As soon as the individual gives 



up this Maya, it vanishes for him and he becomes free. The whole struggle is to 
get rid of this clinging on to time, space, and causation, which are always 
obstacles in our way. What is the theory of evolution? What are the two 
factors? A tremendous potential power which is trying to express itself, and 
circumstances which are holding it down, the environments not allowing it to 
express itself. So, in order to fight with these environments, the power is taking 
new bodies again and again. An amoeba, in the struggle, gets another body and 
conquers some obstacles, then gets another body and so on, until it becomes 
man. Now, if you carry this idea to its logical conclusion, there must come a 
time when that power that was in the amoeba and which evolved as man will 
have conquered all the obstructions that nature can bring before it and will thus 
escape from all its environments. This idea expressed in metaphysics will take 
this form; there are two components in every action, the one the subject, the 
other the object and the one aim of life is to make the subject master of the 
object. For instance, I feel unhappy because a man scolds me. My struggle will 
be to make myself strong enough to conquer the environment, so that he may 
scold and I shall not feel. That is how we are all trying to conquer. What is 
meant by morality? Making the subject strong by attuning it to the Absolute, so 
that finite nature ceases to have control over us. It is a logical conclusion of our 
philosophy that there must come a time when we shall have conquered all the 
environments, because nature is finite. 

Here is another thing to learn. How do you know that nature is finite? You can 
only know this through metaphysics. Nature is that Infinite under limitations. 
Therefore it is finite. So, there must come a time when we shall have conquered 
all environments. And how are we to conquer them? We cannot possibly 
conquer all the objective environments. We cannot. The little fish wants to fly 
from its enemies in the water. How does it do so? By evolving wings and 
becoming a bird. The fish did not change the water or the air; the change was in 
itself. Change is always subjective. All through evolution you find that the 
conquest of nature comes by change in the subject. Apply this to religion and 
morality, and you will find that the conquest of evil comes by the change in the 
subjective alone. That is how the Advaita system gets its whole force, on the 
subjective side of man. To talk of evil and misery is nonsense, because they do 
not exist outside. If I am immune against all anger, I never feel angry. If I am 
proof against all hatred, I never feel hatred. 


This is, therefore, the process by which to achieve that conquest — through the 
subjective, by perfecting the subjective. I may make bold to say that the only 
religion which agrees with, and even goes a little further than modern 
researches, both on physical and moral lines is the Advaita, and that is why it 
appeals to modern scientists so much. They find that the old dualistic theories 
are not enough for them, do not satisfy their necessities. A man must have not 
only faith, but intellectual faith too. Now, in this later part of the nineteenth 
century, such an idea as that religion coming from any other source than one's 
own hereditary religion must be false shows that there is still weakness left, and 
such ideas must be given up. I do not mean that such is the case in this country 
alone, it is in every country, and nowhere more than in my own. This Advaita 
was never allowed to come to the people. At first some monks got hold of it 
and took it to the forests, and so it came to be called the "Forest Philosophy". 

By the mercy of the Lord, the Buddha came and preached it to the masses, and 
the whole nation became Buddhists. Long after that, when atheists and 
agnostics had destroyed the nation again, it was found out that Advaita was the 
only way to save India from materialism. 

Thus has Advaita twice saved India from materialism Before the Buddha came, 
materialism had spread to a fearful extent, and it was of a most hideous kind, 
not like that of the present day, but of a far worse nature. I am a materialist in a 
certain sense, because I believe that there is only One. That is what the 
materialist wants you to believe; only he calls it matter and I call it God. The 
materialists admit that out of this matter all hope, and religion, and everything 
have come. I say, all these have come out of Brahman. But the materialism that 
prevailed before Buddha was that crude sort of materialism which taught, "Eat, 
drink, and be merry; there is no God, soul or heaven; religion is a concoction of 
wicked priests." It taught the morality that so long as you live, you must try to 
live happily; eat, though you have to borrow money for the food, and never 
mind about repaying it. That was the old materialism, and that kind of 
philosophy spread so much that even today it has got the name of "popular 
philosophy". Buddha brought the Vedanta to light, gave it to the people, and 
saved India. A thousand years after his death a similar state of things again 
prevailed. The mobs, the masses, and various races, had been converted to 
Buddhism; naturally the teachings of the Buddha became in time degenerated. 


because most of the people were very ignorant. Buddhism taught no God, no 
Ruler of the universe, so gradually the masses brought their gods, and devils, 
and hobgoblins out again, and a tremendous hotchpotch was made of 
Buddhism in India. Again materialism came to the fore, taking the form of 
licence with the higher classes and superstition with the lower. Then 
Shankaracharya arose and once more revivified the Vedanta philosophy. He 
made it a rationalistic philosophy. In the Upanishads the arguments are often 
very obscure. By Buddha the moral side of the philosophy was laid stress upon, 
and by Shankaracharya, the intellectual side. He worked out, rationalised, and 
placed before men the wonderful coherent system of Advaita. 

Materialism prevails in Europe today. You may pray for the salvation of the 
modern sceptics, but they do not yield, they want reason. The salvation of 
Europe depends on a rationalistic religion, and Advaita — the non-duality, the 
Oneness, the idea of the Impersonal God — is the only religion that can have 
any hold on any intellectual people. It comes whenever religion seems to 
disappear and irreligion seems to prevail, and that is why it has taken ground in 
Europe and America. 

I would say one thing more in connection with this philosophy. In the old 
Upanishads we find sublime poetry; their authors were poets. Plato says, 
inspiration comes to people through poetry, and it seems as if these ancient 
Rishis, seers of Truth, were raised above humanity to show these truths through 
poetry. They never preached, nor philosophised, nor wrote. Music came out of 
their hearts. In Buddha we had the great, universal heart and infinite patience, 
making religion practical and bringing it to everyone's door. In Shankaracharya 
we saw tremendous intellectual power, throwing the scorching light of reason 
upon everything. We want today that bright sun of intellectuality joined with 
the heart of Buddha, the wonderful infinite heart of love and mercy. This union 
will give us the highest philosophy. Science and religion will meet and shake 
hands. Poetry and philosophy will become friends. This will be the religion of 
the future, and if we can work it out, we may be sure that it will be for all times 
and peoples. This is the one way that will prove acceptable to modern science, 
for it has almost come to it. When the scientific teacher asserts that all things 
are the manifestation of one force, does it not remind you of the God of whom 
you hear in the Upanishads: "As the one fire entering into the universe 



expresses itself in various forms, even so that One Soul is expressing Itself in 
every soul and yet is infinitely more besides?" Do you not see whither science 
is tending? The Hindu nation proceeded through the study of the mind, through 
metaphysics and logic. The European nations start from external nature, and 
now they too are coming to the same results. We find that searching through 
the mind we at last come to that Oneness, that Universal One, the Internal Soul 
of everything, the Essence and Reality of everything, the Ever-Eree, the Ever- 
blissful, the Ever-Existing. Through material science we come to the same 
Oneness. Science today is telling us that all things are but the manifestation of 
one energy which is the sum total of everything which exists, and the trend of 
humanity is towards freedom and not towards bondage. Why should men be 
moral? Because through morality is the path towards freedom, and immorality 
leads to bondage. 

Another peculiarity of the Advaita system is that from its very start it is non¬ 
destructive. This is another glory, the boldness to preach, "Do not disturb the 
faith of any, even of those who through ignorance have attached themselves to 
lower forms of worship." That is what it says, do not disturb, but help everyone 
to get higher and higher; include all humanity. This philosophy preaches a God 
who is a sum total. If you seek a universal religion which can apply to 
everyone, that religion must not be composed of only the parts, but it must 
always be their sum total and include all degrees of religious development. 

This idea is not clearly found in any other religious system. They are all parts 
equally struggling to attain to the whole. The existence of the part is only for 
this. So, from the very first, Advaita had no antagonism with the various sects 
existing in India. There are dualists existing today, and their number is by far 
the largest in India, because dualism naturally appeals to less educated minds. 

It is a very convenient, natural, common-sense explanation of the universe. But 
with these dualists, Advaita has no quarrel. The one thinks that God is outside 
the universe, somewhere in heaven, and the other, that He is his own Soul, and 
that it will be a blasphemy to call Him anything more distant. Any idea of 
separation would be terrible. He is the nearest of the near. There is no word in 
any language to express this nearness except the word Oneness. With any other 
idea the Advaitist is not satisfied just as the dualist is shocked with the concept 
of the Advaita, and thinks it blasphemous. At the same time the Advaitist 


knows that these other ideas must be, and so has no quarrel with the dualist 
who is on the right road. From his standpoint, the dualist will have to see many. 
It is a constitutional necessity of his standpoint. Let him have it. The Advaitist 
knows that whatever may be his theories, he is going to the same goal as he 
himself. There he differs entirely from dualist who is forced by his point of 
view to believe that all differing views are wrong. The dualists all the world 
over naturally believe in a Personal God who is purely anthropomorphic, who 
like a great potentate in this world is pleased with some and displeased with 
others. He is arbitrarily pleased with some people or races and showers 
blessing upon them. Naturally the dualist comes to the conclusion that God has 
favourites, and he hopes to be one of them. You will find that in almost every 
religion is the idea: "We are the favourites of our God, and only by believing as 
we do, can you be taken into favour with Him." Some dualists are so narrow as 
to insist that only the few that have been predestined to the favour of God can 
be saved; the rest may try ever so hard, but they cannot be accepted. I challenge 
you to show me one dualistic religion which has not more or less of this 
exclusiveness. And, therefore, in the nature of things, dualistic religions are 
bound to fight and quarrel with each other, and this they have ever been doing. 
Again, these dualists win the popular favour by appealing to the vanity of the 
uneducated. They like to feel that they enjoy exclusive privileges. The dualist 
thinks you cannot be moral until you have a God with a rod in His hand, ready 
to punish you. The unthinking masses are generally dualists, and they, poor 
fellows, have been persecuted for thousands of years in every country; and 
their idea of salvation is, therefore, freedom from the fear of punishment. I was 
asked by a clergyman in America, "What! you have no Devil in your religion? 
How can that be?" But we find that the best and the greatest men that have 
been bom in the world have worked with that high impersonal idea. It is the 
Man who said, "I and my Father are One", whose power has descended unto 
millions. For thousands of years it has worked for good. And we know that the 
same Man, because he was a nondualist, was merciful to others. To the masses 
who could not conceive of anything higher than a Personal God, he said, "Pray 
to your Father in heaven." To others who could grasp a higher idea, he said, "I 
am the vine, ye are the branches," but to his disciples to whom he revealed 
himself more fully, he proclaimed the highest truth, "I and my Father are One." 

It was the great Buddha, who never cared for the dualist gods, and who has 


been called an atheist and materialist, who yet was ready to give up his body 
for a poor goat. That Man set in motion the highest moral ideas any nation can 
have. Whenever there is a moral code, it is ray of light from that Man. We 
cannot force the great hearts of the world into narrow limits, and keep them 
there, especially at this time in the history of humanity when there is a degree 
of intellectual development such as was never dreamed of even a hundred years 
ago, when a wave of scientific knowledge has arisen which nobody, even fifty 
years ago, would have dreamed of. By trying to force people into narrow limits 
you degrade them into animals and unthinking masses. You kill their moral 
life. What is now wanted is a combination of the greatest heart with the highest 
intellectuality, of infinite love with infinite knowledge. The Vedantist gives no 
other attributes to God except these three — that He is Infinite Existence, 
Infinite Knowledge, and Infinite Bliss, and he regards these three as One. 
Existence without knowledge and love cannot be; knowledge without love and 
love without knowledge cannot be. What we want is the harmony of Existence, 
Knowledge, and Bliss Infinite. Eor that is our goal. We want harmony, not one¬ 
sided development. And it is possible to have the intellect of a Shankara with 
the heart of a Buddha. I hope we shall all struggle to attain to that blessed 
combination. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VII 
GOD IN EVERYTHING 

{Delivered in London, 27th October 1896) 

We have seen how the greater portion of our life must of necessity be filled 
with evils, however we may resist, and that this mass of evil is practically 
almost infinite for us. We have been struggling to remedy this since the 
beginning of time, yet everything remains very much the same. The more we 
discover remedies, the more we find ourselves beset by subtler evils. We have 
also seen that all religions propose a God, as the one way of escaping these 
difficulties. All religions tell us that if you take the world as it is, as most 
practical people would advise us to do in this age, then nothing would be left to 
us but evil. They further assert that there is something beyond this world. This 
life in the five senses, life in the material world, is not all; it is only a small 
portion, and merely superficial. Behind and beyond is the Infinite in which 
there is no more evil. Some people call It God, some Allah, some Jehovah, 
Jove, and so on. The Vedantin calls It Brahman. 

The first impression we get of the advice given by religions is that we had 
better terminate our existence. To the question how to cure the evils of life, the 
answer apparently is, give up life. It reminds one of the old story. A mosquito 
settled on the head of a man, and a friend, wishing to kill the mosquito, gave it 
such a blow that he killed both man and mosquito. The remedy of evil seems to 
suggest a similar course of action. Life is full of ills, the world is full of evils; 
that is a fact no one who is old enough to know the world can deny. 

But what is remedy proposed by all the religions? That this world is nothing. 
Beyond this world is something which is very real. Here comes the difficulty. 
The remedy seems to destroy everything. How can that be a remedy? Is there 
no way out then? The Vedanta says that what all the religions advance is 
perfectly true, but it should be properly understood. Often it is misunderstood, 
because the religions are not very clear in their meaning. What we really want 
is head and heart combined. The heart is great indeed; it is through the heart 






that come the great inspirations of life. I would a hundred times rather have a 
little heart and no brain, than be all brains and no heart. Life is possible, 
progress is possible for him who has heart, but he who has no heart and only 
brains dies of dryness. 

At the same time we know that he who is carried along by his heart alone has 
to undergo many ills, for now and then he is liable to tumble into pitfalls. The 
combination of heart and head is what we want. I do not mean that a man 
should compromise his heart for his brain or vice versa, but let everyone have 
an infinite amount of heart and feeling, and at the same time an infinite amount 
of reason. Is there any limit to what we want in this world? Is not the world 
infinite? There is room for an infinite amount of feeling, and so also for an 
infinite amount of culture and reason. Let them come together without limit, let 
them be running together, as it were, in parallel lines each with the other. 

Most of the religions understand the fact, but the error into which they all seem 
to fall is the same; they are carried away by the heart, the feelings. There is evil 
in the world, give up the world; that is the great teaching, and the only 
teaching, no doubt. Give up the world. There cannot be two opinions that to 
understand the truth everyone of us has to give up error. There cannot be two 
opinions that everyone of us in order to have good must give up evil; there 
cannot be two opinions that everyone of us to have life must give up what is 
death. 

And yet, what remains to us, if this theory involves giving up the life of the 
senses, the life as we know it? And what else do we mean by life? If we give 
this up, what remains? 

We shall understand this better, when, later on, we come to the more 
philosophical portions of the Vedanta. But for the present I beg to state that in 
Vedanta alone we find a rational solution of the problem. Here I can only lay 
before you what the Vedanta seeks to teach, and that is the deification of the 
world. The Vedanta does not in reality denounce the world. The ideal of 
renunciation nowhere attains such a height as in the teachings of the Vedanta. 
But, at the same time, dry suicidal advice is not intended; it really means 
deification of the world — giving up the world as we think of it, as we know it. 



as it appears to us — and to know what it really is. Deify it; it is God alone. We 
read at the commencement of one of the oldest of the Upanishads, "Whatever 
exists in this universe is to be covered with the Lord." 

We have to cover everything with the Lord Himself, not by a false sort of 
optimism, not by blinding our eyes to the evil, but by really seeing God in 
everything. Thus we have to give up the world, and when the world is given up, 
what remains? God. What is meant? You can have your wife; it does not mean 
that you are to abandon her, but that you are to see God in the wife. Give up 
your children; what does that mean? To turn them out of doors, as some human 
brutes do in every country? Certainly not. That is diabolism; it is not religion. 
But see God in your children. So, in everything. In life and in death, in 
happiness and in misery, the Lord is equally present. The whole world is full of 
the Lord. Open your eyes and see Him. This is what Vedanta teaches. Give up 
the world which you have conjectured, because your conjecture was based 
upon a very partial experience, upon very poor reasoning, and upon your own 
weakness. Give it up; the world we have been thinking of so long, the world to 
which we have been clinging so long, is a false world of our own creation. 

Give that up; open your eyes and see that as such it never existed; it was a 
dream, Maya. What existed was the Lord Himself. It is He who is in the child, 
in the wife, and in the husband; it is He who is in the good and in the bad; He is 
in the sin and in the sinner; He is in life and in death. 

A tremendous assertion indeed! Yet that is the theme which the Vedanta wants 
to demonstrate, to teach, and to preach. This is just the opening theme. 

Thus we avoid the dangers of life and its evils. Do not desire anything. What 
makes us miserable? The cause of all miseries from which we suffer is desire. 
You desire something, and the desire is not fulfilled; the result is distress. If 
there is no desire, there is no suffering. But here, too, there is the danger of my 
being misunderstood. So it is necessary to explain what I mean by giving up 
desire and becoming free from all misery. The walls have no desire and they 
never suffer. True, but they never evolve. This chair has no desires, it never 
suffers; but it is always a chair. There is a glory in happiness, there is a glory in 
suffering. If I may dare to say so, there is a utility in evil too. The great lesson 
in misery we all know. There are hundreds of things we have done in our lives 


which we wish we had never done, but which, at the same time, have been 
great teachers. As for me, I am glad I have done something good and many 
things bad; glad I have done something right, and glad I have committed many 
errors, because every one of them has been a great lesson. I, as I am now, am 
the resultant of all I have done, all I have thought. Every action and thought 
have had their effect, and these effects are the sum total of my progress. 

We all understand that desires are wrong, but what is meant by giving up 
desires? How could life go on? It would be the same suicidal advice, killing the 
desire and the man too. The solution is this. Not that you should not have 
property, not that you should not have things which are necessary and things 
which are even luxuries. Have all that you want, and more, only know the truth 
and realise it. Wealth does not belong to anybody. Have no idea of 
proprietorship, possessorship. You are nobody, nor am I, nor anyone else. All 
belongs to the Lord, because the opening verse told us to put the Lord in 
everything. God is in the wealth that you enjoy. He is in the desire that rises in 
your mind. He is in the things you buy to satisfy your desire; He is in your 
beautiful attire, in your beautiful ornaments. This is the line of thought. All will 
be metamorphosed as soon as you begin to see things in that light. If you put 
God in your every movement, in your conversation, in your form, in 
everything, the whole scene changes, and the world, instead of appearing as 
one of woe and misery, will become a heaven. 

"The kingdom of heaven is within you," says Jesus; so says the Vedanta, and 
every great teacher. "He that hath eyes to see, let him see, and he that hath ears 
to hear, let him hear." The Vedanta proves that the truth for which we have 
been searching all this time is present, and was all the time with us. In our 
ignorance, we thought we had lost it, and went about the world crying and 
weeping, struggling to find the truth, while all along it was dwelling in our own 
hearts. There alone can we find it. 

If we understand the giving up of the world in its old, crude sense, then it 
would come to this: that we must not work, that we must be idle, sitting like 
lumps of earth, neither thinking nor doing anything, but must become fatalists, 
driven about by every circumstance, ordered about by the laws of nature, 
drifting from place to place. That would be the result. But that is not what is 


meant. We must work. Ordinary mankind, driven everywhere by false desire, 
what do they know of work? The man propelled by his own feelings and his 
own senses, what does he know about work? He works, who is not propelled 
by his own desires, by any selfishness whatsoever. He works, who has no 
ulterior motive in view. He works, who has nothing to gain from work. 

Who enjoys the picture, the seller or the seer? The seller is busy with his 
accounts, computing what his gain will be, how much profit he will realise on 
the picture. His brain is full of that. He is looking at the hammer, and watching 
the bids. He is intent on hearing how fast the bids are rising. That man is 
enjoying the picture who has gone there without any intention of buying or 
selling. He looks at the picture and enjoys it. So this whole universe is a 
picture, and when these desires have vanished, men will enjoy the world, and 
then this buying and selling and these foolish ideas of possession will be ended. 
The money-lender gone, the buyer gone, the seller gone, this world remains the 
picture, a beautiful painting. I never read of any more beautiful conception of 
God than the following: "He is the Great Poet, the Ancient Poet; the whole 
universe is His poem, coming in verses and rhymes and rhythms, written in 
infinite bliss." When we have given up desires, then alone shall we be able to 
read and enjoy this universe of God. Then everything will become deified. 
Nooks and corners, by-ways and shady places, which we thought dark and 
unholy, will be all deified. They will all reveal their true nature, and we shall 
smile at ourselves and think that all this weeping and crying has been but 
child's play, and we were only standing by, watching. 

So, do your work, says the Vedanta. It first advises us how to work — by 
giving up — giving up the apparent, illusive world. What is meant by that? 
Seeing God everywhere. Thus do you work. Desire to live a hundred years, 
have all earthly desires, if you wish, only deify them, convert them into heaven. 
Have the desire to live a long life of helpfulness, of blissfulness and activity on 
this earth. Thus working, you will find the way out. There is no other way. If a 
man plunges headlong into foolish luxuries of the world without knowing the 
truth, he has missed his footing, he cannot reach the goal. And if a man curses 
the world, goes into a forest, mortifies his flesh, and kills himself little by little 
by starvation, makes his heart a barren waste, kills out all feelings, and 
becomes harsh, stern, and dried-up, that man also has missed the way. These 




are the two extremes, the two mistakes at either end. Both have lost the way, 
both have missed the goal. 

So work, says the Vedanta, putting God in everything, and knowing Him to be 
in everything. Work incessantly, holding life as something deified, as God 
Himself, and knowing that this is all we have to do, this is all we should ask 
for. God is in everything, where else shall we go to find Him? He is already in 
every work, in every thought, in every feeling. Thus knowing, we must work 

— this is the only way, there is no other. Thus the effects of work will not bind 
us. We have seen how false desires are the cause of all the misery and evil we 
suffer, but when they are thus deified, purified, through God, they bring no 
evil, they bring no misery. Those who have not learnt this secret will have to 
live in a demoniacal world until they discover it. Many do not know what an 
infinite mine of bliss is in them, around them, everywhere; they have not yet 
discovered it. What is a demoniacal world? The Vedanta says, ignorance. 

We are dying of thirst sitting on the banks of the mightiest river. We are dying 
of hunger sitting near heaps of food. Here is the blissful universe, yet we do not 
find it. We are in it all the time, and we are always mistaking it. Religion 
proposes to find this out for us. The longing for this blissful universe is in all 
hearts. It has been the search of all nations, it is the one goal of religion, and 
this ideal is expressed in various languages in different religions. It is only the 
difference of language that makes all these apparent divergences. One 
expresses a thought in one way, another a little differently, yet perhaps each is 
meaning exactly what the other is expressing in a different language. 

More questions arise in connection with this. It is very easy to talk. From my 
childhood I have heard of seeing God everywhere and in everything, and then I 
can really enjoy the world, but as soon as I mix with the world, and get a few 
blows from it, the idea vanishes. I am walking in the street thinking that God is 
in every man, and a strong man comes along and gives me a push and I fall flat 
on the footpath. Then I rise up quickly with clenched fist, the blood has rushed 
to my head, and the reflection goes. Immediately I have become mad. 
Everything is forgotten; instead of encountering God I see the devil. Ever since 
we were born we have been told to see God in all. Every religion teaches that 

— see God in everything and everywhere. Do you not remember in the New 



Testament how Christ says so? We have all been taught that; but it is when we 
come to the practical side, that the difficulty begins. You all remember how in 
Aesop’s Fables a fine stag is looking at his form reflected in a lake and is 
saying to his young one, "How powerful I am, look at my splendid head, look 
at my limbs, how strong and muscular they are; and how swiftly I can run." In 
the meantime he hears the barking of dogs in the distance, and immediately 
takes to his heels, and after he has run several miles, he comes back panting. 
The young one says, "You just told me how strong you were, how was it that 
when the dog barked, you ran away?" "Yes, my son; but when the dogs bark all 
my confidence vanishes." Such is the case with us. We think highly of 
humanity, we feel ourselves strong and valiant, we make grand resolves; but 
when the "dogs" of trial and temptation bark, we are like the stag in the fable. 
Then, if such is the case, what is the use of teaching all these things? There is 
the greatest use. The use is this, that perseverance will finally conquer. Nothing 
can be done in a day. 

"This Self is first to be heard, then to be thought upon, and then meditated 
upon." Everyone can see the sky, even the very worm crawling upon the earth 
sees the blue sky, but how very far away it is! So it is with our ideal. It is far 
away, no doubt, but at the same time, we know that we must have it. We must 
even have the highest ideal. Unfortunately in this life, the vast majority of 
persons are groping through this dark life without any ideal at all. If a man with 
an ideal makes a thousand mistakes, I am sure that the man without an ideal 
makes fifty thousand. Therefore, it is better to have an ideal. And this ideal we 
must hear about as much as we can, till it enters into our hearts, into our brains, 
into our very veins, until it tingles in every drop of our blood and permeates 
every pore in our body. We must meditate upon it. "Out of the fullness of the 
heart the mouth speaketh," and out of the fullness of the heart the hand works 
too. 

It is thought which is the propelling force in us. Fill the mind with the highest 
thoughts, hear them day after day, think them month after month. Never mind 
failures; they are quite natural, they are the beauty of life, these failures. What 
would life be without them? It would not be worth having if it were not for 
struggles. Where would be the poetry of life? Never mind the struggles, the 
mistakes. I never heard a cow tell a lie, but it is only a cow — never a man. So 



never mind these failures, these little backslidings; hold the ideal a thousand 
times, and if you fail a thousand times, make the attempt once more. The ideal 
of man is to see God in everything. But if you cannot see Him in everything, 
see Him in one thing, in that thing which you like best, and then see Him in 
another. So on you can go. There is infinite life before the soul. Take your time 
and you will achieve your end. 

"He, the One, who vibrates more quickly than mind, who attains to more speed 
than mind can ever do, whom even the gods reach not, nor thought grasps. He 
moving, everything moves. In Him all exists. He is moving. He is also 
immovable. He is near and He is far. He is inside everything. He is outside 
everything, interpenetrating everything. Whoever sees in every being that same 
Atman, and whoever sees everything in that Atman, he never goes far from that 
Atman. When all life and the whole universe are seen in this Atman, then alone 
man has attained the secret. There is no more delusion for him. Where is any 
more misery for him who sees this Oneness in the universe?" 

This is another great theme of the Vedanta, this Oneness of life, this Oneness of 
everything. We shall see how it demonstrates that all our misery comes through 
ignorance, and this ignorance is the idea of manifoldness, this separation 
between man and man, between nation and nation, between earth and moon, 
between moon and sun. Out of this idea of separation between atom and atom 
comes all misery. But the Vedanta says this separation does not exist, it is not 
real. It is merely apparent, on the surface. In the heart of things there is Unity 
still. If you go below the surface, you find that Unity between man and man, 
between races and races, high and low, rich and poor, gods and men, and men 
and animals. If you go deep enough, all will be seen as only variations of the 
One, and he who has attained to this conception of Oneness has no more 
delusion. What can delude him? He knows the reality of everything, the secret 
of everything. Where is there any more misery for him? What does he desire? 
He has traced the reality of everything to the Lord, the Centre, the Unity of 
everything, and that is Eternal Existence, Eternal Knowledge, Eternal Bliss. 
Neither death nor disease, nor sorrow, nor misery, nor discontent is there. All is 
Perfect Union and Perfect Bliss. Eor whom should he mourn then? In the 
Reality, there is no death, there is no misery; in the Reality, there is no one to 
mourn for, no one to be sorry for. He has penetrated everything, the Pure One, 


the Formless, the Bodiless, the Stainless. He the Knower, He the Great Poet, 
the Self-Existent, He who is giving to everyone what he deserves. They grope 
in darkness who worship this ignorant world, the world that is produced out of 
ignorance, thinking of it as Existence, and those who live their whole lives in 
this world, and never find anything better or higher, are groping in still greater 
darkness. But he who knows the secret of nature, seeing That which is beyond 
nature through the help of nature, he crosses death, and through the help of 
That which is beyond nature, he enjoys Eternal Bliss. "Thou sun, who hast 
covered the Truth with thy golden disc, do thou remove the veil, so that I may 
see the Truth that is within thee. I have known the Truth that is within thee, I 
have known what is the real meaning of thy rays and thy glory and have seen 
That which shines in thee; the Truth in thee I see, and That which is within thee 
is within me, and I am That." 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER VIII 
REALISATION 

{Delivered in London, 29th October 1896) 

I will read to you from one of the Upanishads. It is called the Katha Upanishad. 
Some of you, perhaps, have read the translation by Sir Edwin Arnold, called 
the Secret of Death. In our last [i.e. a previous] lecture we saw how the inquiry 
which started with the origin of the world, and the creation of the universe, 
failed to obtain a satisfactory answer from without, and how it then turned 
inwards. This book psychologically takes up that suggestion, questioning into 
the internal nature of man. It was first asked who created the external world, 
and how it came into being. Now the question is: What is that in man; which 
makes him live and move, and what becomes of that when he dies? The first 
philosophers studied the material substance, and tried to reach the ultimate 
through that. At the best, they found a personal governor of the universe, a 
human being immensely magnified, but yet to all intents and purposes a human 
being. But that could not be the whole of truth; at best, it could be only partial 
truth. We see this universe as human beings, and our God is our human 
explanation of the universe. 

Suppose a cow were philosophical and had religion it would have a cow 
universe, and a cow solution of the problem, and it would not be possible that it 
should see our God. Suppose cats became philosophers, they would see a cat 
universe and have a cat solution of the problem of the universe, and a cat ruling 
it. So we see from this that our explanation of the universe is not the whole of 
the solution. Neither does our conception cover the whole of the universe. It 
would be a great mistake to accept that tremendously selfish position which 
man is apt to take. Such a solution of the universal problem as we can get from 
the outside labours under this difficulty that in the first place the universe we 
see is our own particular universe, our own view of the Reality. That Reality 
we cannot see through the senses; we cannot comprehend It. We only know the 
universe from the point of view of beings with five senses. Suppose we obtain 
another sense, the whole universe must change for us. Suppose we had a 






magnetic sense, it is quite possible that we might then find millions and 
millions of forces in existence which we do not now know, and for which we 
have no present sense or feeling. Our senses are limited, very limited indeed; 
and within these limitations exists what we call our universe; and our God is 
the solution of that universe, but that cannot be the solution of the whole 
problem. But man cannot stop there. He is a thinking being and wants to find a 
solution which will comprehensively explain all the universes. He wants to see 
a world which is at once the world of men, and of gods, and of all possible 
beings, and to find a solution which will explain all phenomena. 

We see, we must first find the universe which includes all universes; we must 
find something which, by itself, must be the material running through all these 
various planes of existence, whether we apprehend it through the senses or not. 
If we could possibly find something which we could know as the common 
property of the lower as well as of the higher worlds, then our problem would 
be solved. Even if by the sheer force of logic alone we could understand that 
there must be one basis of all existence, then our problem might approach to 
some sort of solution; but this solution certainly cannot be obtained only 
through the world we see and know, because it is only a partial view of the 
whole. 

Our only hope then lies in penetrating deeper. The early thinkers discovered 
that the farther they were from; the centre, the more marked were the variations 
and differentiations; and that the nearer they approached the centre, the nearer 
they were to unity. The nearer we are to the centre of a circle, the nearer we are 
to the common ground in which all the radii meet; and the farther we are from 
the centre, the more divergent is our radial line from the others. The external 
world is far away from the centre, and so there is no common ground in it 
where all the phenomena of existence can meet. At best, the external world is 
but one part of the whole of phenomena. There are other parts, the mental, the 
moral, and the intellectual — the various planes of existence — and to take up 
only one, and find a solution of the whole out of that one, is simply impossible. 
We first, therefore, want to find somewhere a centre from which, as it were, all 
the other planes of existence start, and standing there we should try to find a 
solution. That is the proposition. And where is that centre? It is within us. The 
ancient sages penetrated deeper and deeper until they found that in the 



innermost core of the human soul is the centre of the whole universe. All the 
planes gravitate towards that one point. That is the common ground, and 
standing there alone can we find a common solution. So the question who made 
this world is not very philosophical, nor does its solution amount to anything. 

This the Katha Upanishad speaks in very figurative language. There was, in 
ancient times, a very rich man, who made a certain sacrifice which required 
that he should give away everything that he had. Now, this man was not 
sincere. He wanted to get the fame and glory of having made the sacrifice, but 
he was only giving things which were of no further use to him — old cows, 
barren, blind, and lame. He had a boy called Nachiketas. This boy saw that his 
father was not doing what was right, that he was breaking his vow; but he did 
not know what to say to him. In India, father and mother are living gods to their 
children. And so the boy approached the father with the greatest respect and 
humbly inquired of him, "Father, to whom are you going to give me? For your 
sacrifice requires that everything shall be given away." The father was very 
much vexed at this question and replied, "What do you mean, boy? A father 
giving away his own son?" The boy asked the question a second and a third 
time, and then the angry father answered, "Thee I give unto Death (Yama)." 
And the story goes on to say that the boy went to Yama, the god of death. 

Yama was the first man who died. He went to heaven and became the governor 
of all the Pitris; all the good people who die, go, and live with him for a long 
time. He is a very pure and holy person, chaste and good, as his name (Yama) 
implies. 

So the boy went to Yama's world. But even gods are sometimes not at home, 
and three days this boy had to wait there. After the third day Yama returned. "O 
learned one," said Yama, "you have been waiting here for three days without 
food, and you are a guest worthy of respect. Salutation to thee, O Brahmin, and 
welfare to me! I am very sorry I was not at home. But for that I will make 
amends. Ask three boons, one for each day." And the boy asked, "My first 
boon is that my father's anger against me may pass away; that he will be kind 
to me and recognise me when you allow me to depart." Yama granted this 
fully. The next boon was that he wanted to know about a certain sacrifice 
which took people to heaven. Now we have seen that the oldest idea which we 
got in the Samhita portion of the Vedas was only about heaven where they had 


bright bodies and lived with the fathers. Gradually other ideas came, but they 
were not satisfying; there was still need for something higher. Living in heaven 
would not be very different from life in this world. At best, it would only be a 
very healthy rich man's life, with plenty of sense-enjoyments and a sound body 
which knows no disease. It would be this material world, only a little more 
refined; and we have seen the difficulty that the external material world can 
never solve the problem. So no heaven can solve the problem. If this world 
cannot solve the problem, no multiplication of this world can do so, because we 
must always remember that matter is only an infinitesimal part of the 
phenomena of nature. The vast part of phenomena which we actually see is not 
matter. For instance, in every moment of our life what a great part is played by 
thought and feeling, compared with the material phenomena outside! How vast 
is this internal world with its tremendous activity! The sense-phenomena are 
very small compared with it. The heaven solution commits this mistake; it 
insists that the whole of phenomena is only in touch, taste, sight, etc. So this 
idea of heaven did not give full satisfaction to all. Yet Nachiketas asks, as the 
second boon, about some sacrifice through which people might attain to this 
heaven. There was an idea in the Vedas that these sacrifices pleased the gods 
and took human beings to heaven. 

In studying all religions you will notice the fact that whatever is old becomes 
holy. For instance, our forefathers in India used to write on birch bark, but in 
time they learnt how to make paper. Yet the birch bark is still looked upon as 
very holy. When the utensils in which they used to cook in ancient times were 
improved upon, the old ones became holy; and nowhere is this idea more kept 
up than in India. Old methods, which must be nine or ten thousand years old, as 
of rubbing two sticks together to make fire, are still followed. At the time of 
sacrifice no other method will do. So with the other branch of the Asiatic 
Aryans. Their modern descendants still like to obtain fire from lightning, 
showing that they used to get fire in this way. Even when they learnt other 
customs, they kept up the old ones, which then became holy. So with the 
Hebrews. They used to write on parchment. They now write on paper, but 
parchment is very holy. So with all nations. Every rite which you now consider 
holy was simply an old custom, and the Vedic sacrifice were of this nature. In 
course of time, as they found better methods of life, their ideas were much 
improved; still these old forms remained, and from time to time they were 


practiced and received a holy significance. 

Then, a body of men made it their business to carry on these sacrifices. These 
were the priests, who speculated on the sacrifices, and the sacrifices became 
everything to them. The gods came to enjoy the fragrance of the sacrifices, and 
it was considered that everything in this world could be got by the power of 
sacrifices. If certain oblations were made, certain hymns chanted, certain 
peculiar forms of altars made, the gods would grant everything. So Nachiketas 
asks by what form of sacrifice can a man go to heaven. The second boon was 
also readily granted by Yama who promised that this sacrifice should 
henceforth be named after Nachiketas. 

Then the third boon comes, and with that the Upanishad proper begins. The 
boy said, "There is this difficulty: when a man dies some say he is, others that 
he is not. Instructed by you I desire to understand this." But Yama was 
frightened. He had been very glad to grant the other two boons. Now he said, 
"The gods in ancient times were puzzled on this point. This subtle law is not 
easy to understand. Choose some other boon, O Nachiketas, do not press me on 
this point, release me." 

The boy was determined, and said, "What you have said is true, O Death, that 
even the gods had doubts on this point, and it is no easy matter to understand. 
But I cannot obtain another exponent like you and there is no other boon equal 
to this." 

Death said, "Ask for sons and grandsons who will live one hundred years, 
many cattle, elephants, gold, and horses. Ask for empire on this earth and live 
as many ears as you like. Or choose any other boon which you think equal to 
these — wealth and long life. Or be thou a king, O Nachiketas, on the wide 
earth. I will make thee the enjoyer of all desires. Ask for all those desires which 
are difficult to obtain in the world. These heavenly maidens with chariots and 
music, which are not to be obtained by man, are yours. Let them serve you. O 
Nachiketas, but do not question me as to what comes after death." 

Nachiketas said, "These are merely things of a day, O Death, they wear away 
the energy of all the sense-organs. Even the longest life is very short. These 


horses and chariots, dances and songs, may remain with Thee. Man cannot be 
satisfied by wealth. Can we retain wealth when we behold Thee? We shall live 
only so long as Thou desires". Only the boon which I have asked is chosen by 
me." 


Yama was pleased with this answer and said, "Perfection is one thing and 
enjoyment another; these two having different ends, engage men differently. 

He who chooses perfection becomes pure. He who chooses enjoyment misses 
his true end. Both perfection and enjoyment present themselves to man; the 
wise man having examined both distinguishes one from the other. He chooses 
perfection as being superior to enjoyment, but the foolish man chooses 
enjoyment for the pleasure of his body. O Nachiketas, having thought upon the 
things which are only apparently desirable, thou hast wisely abandoned them." 
Death then proceeded to teach Nachiketas. 

We now get a very developed idea of renunciation and Vedic morality, that 
until one has conquered the desires for enjoyment the truth will not shine in 
him. So long as these vain desires of our senses are clamouring and as it were 
dragging us outwards every moment, making us slaves to everything outside — 
to a little colour, a little taste, a little touch — notwithstanding all our 
pretensions, how can the truth express itself in our hearts? 

Yama said, "That which is beyond never rises before the mind of a thoughtless 
child deluded by the folly of riches. 'This world exists, the other does not,' 
thinking thus they come again and again under my power. To understand this 
truth is very difficult. Many, even hearing it continually, do not understand it, 
for the speaker must be wonderful, so must be the hearer. The teacher must be 
wonderful, so must be the taught. Neither is the mind to be disturbed By vain 
arguments, for it is no more a question of argument, it is a question of fact." 

We have always heard that every religion insists on our having faith. We have 
been taught to believe blindly. Well, this idea of blind faith is objectionable, no 
doubt, but analysing it, we find that behind it is a very great truth. What it 
really means is what we read now. The mind is not to be ruffled by vain 
arguments, because argument will not help us to know God. It is a question of 
fact, and not of argument. All argument and reasoning must be based upon 
certain perceptions. Without these, there cannot be any argument. Reasoning is 




the method of comparison between certain facts which we have already 
perceived. If these perceived facts are not there already, there cannot be any 
reasoning. If this is true of external phenomena, why should it not be so of the 
internal? The chemist takes certain chemicals and certain results are produced. 
This is a fact; you see it, sense it, and make that the basis on which to build all 
your chemical arguments. So with the physicists, so with all other sciences. All 
knowledge must stand on perception of certain facts, and upon that we have to 
build our reasoning. But, curiously enough the vast majority of mankind think, 
especially at the present time, that no such perception is possible in religion, 
that religion can only be apprehended by vain arguments. Therefore we are told 
not to disturb the mind by vain arguments. Religion is a question of fact, not of 
talk. We have to analyse our own souls and to find what is there. We have to 
understand it and to realise what is understood. That is religion. No amount of 
talk will make religion. So the question whether there is a God or not can never 
be proved by argument, for the arguments are as much on one side as on the 
other. But if there is a God, He is in our own hearts. Have you ever seen Him? 
The question as to whether this world exists or not has not yet been decided, 
and the debate between the idealists and the realists is endless. Yet we know 
that the world exists, that it goes on. We only change the meaning of words. 

So, with all the questions of life, we must come to facts. There are certain 
religious facts which, as in external science, have to be perceived, and upon 
them religion will be built. Of course, the extreme claim that you must believe 
every dogma of a religion is degrading to the human mind. The man who asks 
you to believe everything, degrades himself, and, if you believe, degrades you 
too. The sages of the world have only the right to tell us that they have 
analysed their minds and have found these facts, and if we do the same we shall 
also believe, and not before. That is all that there is in religion. But you must 
always remember this, that as a matter of fact 99.9 per cent of those who attack 
religion have never analysed their minds, have never struggled to get at the 
facts. So their arguments do not have any weight against religion, any more 
than the words of a blind man who cries out, "You are all fools who believe in 
the sun," would affect us. 

This is one great idea to learn and to hold on to, this idea of realisation. This 
turmoil and fight and difference in religions will cease only when we 
understand that religion is not in books and temples. It is an actual perception. 


Only the man who has actually perceived God and soul has religion. There is 
no real difference between the highest ecclesiastical giant who can talk by the 
volume, and the lowest, most ignorant materialist. We are all atheists; let us 
confess it. Mere intellectual assent does not make us religious. Take a 
Christian, or a Mohammedan, or a follower of any other religion in the world. 
Any man who truly realised the truth of the Sermon on the Mount would be 
perfect, and become a god immediately. Yet it is said that there are many 
millions of Christians in the world. What is meant is that mankind may at some 
time try to realise that Sermon. Not one in twenty millions is a real Christian. 

So, in India, there are said to be three hundred millions of Vedantins. But if 
there were one in a thousand who had actually realised religion, this world 
would soon be greatly changed. We are all atheists, and yet we try to fight the 
man who admits it. We are all in the dark; religion is to us a mere intellectual 
assent, a mere talk, a mere nothing. We often consider a man religious who can 
talk well. But this is not religion. "Wonderful methods of joining words, 
rhetorical powers, and explaining texts of the books in various ways — these 
are only for the enjoyment of the learned, and not religion." Religion comes 
when that actual realisation in our own souls begins. That will be the dawn of 
religion; and then alone we shall be moral. Now we are not much more moral 
than the animals. We are only held down by the whips of society. If society 
said today, "I will not punish you if you steal", we should just make a rush for 
each other's property. It is the policeman that makes us moral. It is social 
opinion that makes us moral, and really we are little better than animals. We 
understand how much this is so in the secret of our own hearts. So let us not be 
hypocrites. Let us confess that we are not religious and have no right to look 
down on others. We are all brothers and we shall be truly moral when we have 
realised religion. 

If you have seen a certain country, and a man forces you to say that you have 
not seen it, still in your heart of hearts you know you have. So, when you see 
religion and God in a more intense sense than you see this external world, 
nothing will be able to shake your belief. Then you have real faith. That is what 
is meant by the words in your Gospel, "He who has faith even as a grain of 
mustard seed." Then you will know the Truth because you have become the 
Truth. 


This is the watchword of the Vedanta — realise religion, no talking will do. 

But it is done with great difficulty. He has hidden Himself inside the atom, this 
Ancient One who resides in the inmost recess of every human heart. The sages 
realised Him through the power of introspection, and got beyond both joy and 
misery, beyond what we call virtue and vice, beyond good and bad deeds, 
beyond being and non-being; he who has seen Him has seen the Reality. But 
what then about heaven? It was the idea of happiness minus unhappiness. That 
is to say, what we want is the joys of this life minus its sorrows. That is a very 
good idea, no doubt; it comes naturally; but it is a mistake throughout, because 
there is no such thing as absolute good, nor any such thing as absolute evil. 

You have all heard of that rich man in Rome who learnt one day that he had 
only about a million pounds of his property left; he said, "What shall I do 
tomorrow?" and forthwith committed suicide. A million pounds was poverty to 
him. What is joy, and what is sorrow? It is a vanishing quantity, continually 
vanishing. When I was a child I thought if I could be a cabman, it would be the 
very acme of happiness for me to drive about. I do not think so now. To what 
joy will you cling? This is the one point we must all try to understand, and it is 
one of the last superstitions to leave us. Everyone's idea of pleasure is different. 
I have seen a man who is not happy unless he swallows a lump of opium every 
day. He may dream of a heaven where the land is made of opium. That would 
be a very bad heaven for me. Again and again in Arabian poetry we read of 
heaven with beautiful gardens, through which rivers run. I lived much of my 
life in a country where there is too much water; many villages are flooded and 
thousands of lives are sacrificed every year. So, my heaven would not have 
gardens through which rivers flow; I would have a land where very little rain 
falls. Our pleasures are always changing. If a young man dreams of heaven, he 
dreams of a heaven where he will have a beautiful wife. When that same man 
becomes old he does not want a wife. It is our necessities which make our 
heaven, and the heaven changes with the change of our necessities. If we had a 
heaven like that desired by those to whom sense-enjoyment is the very end of 
existence, then we would not progress. That would be the most terrible curse 
we could pronounce on the soul. Is this all we can come to? A little weeping 
and dancing, and then to die like a dog! What a curse you pronounce on the 
head of humanity when you long for these things! That is what you do when 



you cry after the joys of this world, for you do not know what true Joy is. What 
philosophy insists on is not to give up joys, but to know what joy really is. The 
Norwegian heaven is a tremendous fighting place where they all sit before 
Odin; they have a wild boar hunt, and then they go to war and slash each other 
to pieces. But in some way or other, after a few hours of such fighting, the 
wounds are all healed up, and they go into a hall where the boar has been 
roasted, and have a carousal. And then the wild boar takes form again, ready to 
be hunted the next day. That is much the same thing as our heaven, not a whit 
worse, only our ideas may be a little more refined. We want to hunt wild boars, 
and get to a place where all enjoyments will continue, just as the Norwegian 
imagines that the wild boar is hunted and eaten every day, and recovers the 
next day. 

Now, philosophy insists that there is a joy which is absolute, which never 
changes. That joy cannot be the joys and pleasures we have in this life, and yet 
Vedanta shows that everything that is joyful in this life is but a particle of that 
real joy, because that is the only joy there is. Every moment really we are 
enjoying the absolute bliss, though covered up, misunderstood, and caricatured. 
Wherever there is any blessing, blissfulness, or joy, even the joy of the thief in 
stealing, it is that absolute bliss coming out, only it has become obscured, 
muddled up, as it were, with all sorts of extraneous conditions, and 
misunderstood. But to understand that, we have to go through the negation, and 
then the positive side will begin. We have to give up ignorance and all that is 
false, and then truth will begin to reveal itself to us. When we have grasped the 
truth, things which we gave up at first will take new shape and form, will 
appear to us in a new light, and become deified. They will have become 
sublimated, and then we shall understand them in their true light. But to 
understand them, we have first to get a glimpse of truth; we must give them up 
at first, and then we get them back again, deified. We have to give up all our 
miseries and sorrows, all our little joys. 

"That which all the Vedas declare, which is proclaimed by all penances, 
seeking which men lead lives of continence, I will tell you in one word — it is 
'Om'." You will find this word "Om" praised very much in the Vedas, and it is 
held to be very sacred. 



Now Yama answers the question: "What becomes of a man when the body dies 
?" "This Wise One never dies, is never born, It arises from nothing, and 
nothing arises from It. Unborn, Eternal, Everlasting, this Ancient One can 
never be destroyed with the destruction of the body. If the slayer thinks he can 
slay, or if the slain thinks he is slain, they both do not know the truth, for the 
Self neither slays nor is slain." A most tremendous position. I should like to 
draw your attention to the adjective in the first line, which is "wise". As we 
proceed we shall find that the ideal of the Vedanta is that all wisdom and all 
purity are in the soul already, dimly expressed or better expressed — that is all 
the difference. The difference between man and man, and all things in the 
whole creation, is not in kind but only in degree. The background, the reality, 
of everyone is that same Eternal, Ever Blessed, Ever Pure, and Ever Perfect 
One. It is the Atman, the Soul, in the saint and the sinner, in the happy and the 
miserable, in the beautiful and the ugly, in men and in animals; it is the same 
throughout. It is the shining One. The difference is caused by the power of 
expression. In some It is expressed more, in others less, but this difference of 
expression has no effect upon the Atman. If in their dress one man shows more 
of his body than another, it does not make any difference in their bodies; the 
difference is in their dress. We had better remember here that throughout the 
Vedanta philosophy, there is no such thing as good and bad, they are not two 
different things; the same thing is good or bad, and the difference is only in 
degree. The very thing I call pleasurable today, tomorrow under better 
circumstances I may call pain. The fire that warms us can also consume us; it is 
not the fault of the fire. Thus, the Soul being pure and perfect, the man who 
does evil is giving the lie unto himself, he does not know the nature of himself. 
Even in the murderer the pure Soul is there; It dies not. It was his mistake; he 
could not manifest It; he had covered It up. Nor in the man who thinks that he 
is killed is the Soul killed; It is eternal. It can never be killed, never destroyed. 
"Infinitely smaller than the smallest, infinitely larger than the largest, this Lord 
of all is present in the depths of every human heart. The sinless, bereft of all 
misery, see Him through the mercy of the Lord; the Bodiless, yet dwelling in 
the body; the Spaceless, yet seeming to occupy space; Infinite, Omnipresent: 
knowing such to be the Soul, the sages never are miserable." 

"This Atman is not to be realised by the power of speech, nor by a vast 
intellect, nor by the study of their Vedas." This is a very bold utterance. As I 


told you before, the sages were very bold thinkers, and never stopped at 
anything. You will remember that in India these Vedas are regarded in a much 
higher light than even the Christians regard their Bible. Your idea of revelation 
is that a man was inspired by God; but in India the idea is that things exist 
because they are in the Vedas. In and through the Vedas the whole creation has 
come. All that is called knowledge is in the Vedas. Every word is sacred and 
eternal, eternal as the soul, without beginning and without end. The whole of 
the Creator's mind is in this book, as it were. That is the light in which the 
Vedas are held. Why is this thing moral? Because the Vedas say so. Why is 
that thing immoral? Because the Vedas say so. In spite of that, look at the 
boldness of these sages whom proclaimed that the truth is not to be found by 
much study of the Vedas. "With whom the Lord is pleased, to that man He 
expresses Himself." But then, the objection may be advanced that this is 
something like partisanship. But at Yama explains, "Those who are evil-doers, 
whose minds area not peaceful, can never see the Light. It is to those whore are 
true in heart, pure in deed, whose senses are controlled, that this Self manifests 
Itself." 

Here is a beautiful figure. Picture the Self to be then rider and this body the 
chariot, the intellect to be the charioteer, mind the reins, and the senses the 
horses. He whose horses are well broken, and whose reins are strong and kept 
well in the hands of the charioteer (the intellect) reaches the goal which is the 
state of Him, the Omnipresent. But the man whose horses (the senses) are not 
controlled, nor the reins (the mind) well managed, goes to destruction. This 
Atman in all beings does not manifest Himself to the eyes or the senses, but 
those whose minds have become purified and refined realise Him. Beyond all 
sound, all sight, beyond form, absolute, beyond all taste and touch, infinite, 
without beginning and without end, even beyond nature, the Unchangeable; he 
who realises Him, frees himself from the jaws of death. But it is very difficult. 
It is, as it were, walking on the edge of a razor; the way is long and perilous, 
but struggle on, do not despair. Awake, arise, and stop not till the goal is 
reached. 

The one central idea throughout all the Upanishads is that of realisation. A 
great many questions will arise from time to time, and especially to the modern 
man. There will be the question of utility, there will be various other questions. 


but in all we shall find that we are prompted by our past associations. It is 
association of ideas that has such a tremendous power over our minds. To those 
who from childhood have always heard of a Personal God and the personality 
of the mind, these ideas will of course appear very stern and harsh, but if they 
listen to them and think over them, they will become part of their lives and will 
no longer frighten them. The great question that generally arises is the utility of 
philosophy. To that there can be only one answer: if on the utilitarian ground it 
is good for men to seek for pleasure, why should not those whose pleasure is in 
religious speculation seek for that? Because sense-enjoyments please many, 
they seek for them, but there may be others whom they do not please, who 
want higher enjoyment. The dog's pleasure is only in eating and drinking. The 
dog cannot understand the pleasure of the scientist who gives up everything, 
and, perhaps, dwells on the top of a mountain to observe the position of certain 
stars. The dogs may smile at him and think he is a madman. Perhaps this poor 
scientist never had money enough to marry even, and lives very simply. May 
be, the dog laughs at him. But the scientist says, "My dear dog, your pleasure is 
only in the senses which you enjoy, and you know nothing beyond; but for me 
this is the most enjoyable life, and if you have the right to seek your pleasure in 
your own way, so have I in mine." The mistake is that we want to tie the whole 
world down to our own plane of thought and to make our mind the measure of 
the whole universe. To you, the old sense-things are, perhaps, the greatest 
pleasure, but it is not necessary that my pleasure should be the same, and when 
you insist upon that, I differ from you. That is the difference between the 
worldly utilitarian and the religious man. The first man says, "See how happy I 
am. I get money, but do not bother my head about religion. It is too 
unsearchable, and I am happy without it." So far, so good; good for all 
utilitarians. But this world is terrible. If a man gets happiness in any way 
excepting by injuring his fellow-beings, godspeed him; but when this man 
comes to me and says, "You too must do these things, you will be a fool if you 
do not," I say, "You are wrong, because the very things, which are pleasurable 
to you, have not the slightest attraction for me. If I had to go after a few 
handfuls of gold, my life would not be worth living! I should die." That is the 
answer the religious man would make. The fact is that religion is possible only 
for those who have finished with these lower things. We must have our own 
experiences, must have our full run. It is only when we have finished this run 
that the other world opens. 


The enjoyments of the senses sometimes assume another phase which is 
dangerous and tempting. You will always hear the idea — in very old times, in 
every religion — that a time will come when all the miseries of life wills cease, 
and only its joys and pleasures will remain, and this earth will become a 
heaven. That I do not believe. This earth will always remain this same world. It 
is a most terrible thing to say, yet I do not see my way out of item The misery 
in the world is like chronic rheumatism in the body; drive it from one part and 
it goes to another, drive it from there and you will feel it somewhere else. 
Whatever you do, it is still there. In olden times people lived in forests, and ate 
each other; in modern times they do not eat each other's flesh, but they cheat 
one another. Whole countries and cities are ruined by cheating. That does not 
show much progress. I do not see that what you call progress in the world is 
other than the multiplication of desires. If one thing is obvious to me it is this 
that desires bring all misery; it is the state of the beggar, who is always begging 
for something, and unable to see anything without the wish to possess it, is 
always longing, longing for more. If the power to satisfy our desires is 
increased in arithmetical progression, the power of desire is increased in 
geometrical progression. The sum total of happiness and misery in this world is 
at least the same throughout. If a wave rises in the ocean it makes a hollow 
somewhere. If happiness comes to one man, unhappiness comes to another or, 
perhaps, to some animal. Men are increasing in numbers and some animals are 
decreasing; we are killing them off, and taking their land ; we are taking all 
means of sustenance from them. How can we say, then, that happiness is 
increasing? The strong race eats up the weaker, but do you think that the strong 
race will be very happy? No; they will begin to kill each other. I do not see on 
practical grounds how this world can become a heaven. Facts are against it. On 
theoretical grounds also, I see it cannot be. 

Perfection is always infinite. We are this infinite already, and we are trying to 
manifest that infinity. You and I, and all beings, are trying to manifest it. So far 
it is all right. But from this fact some German philosophers have started a 
peculiar theory — that this manifestation will become higher and higher until 
we attain perfect manifestation, until we have become perfect beings. What is 
meant by perfect manifestation? Perfection means infinity, and manifestation 
means limit, and so it means that we shall become unlimited limiteds, which is 


self-contradictory. Such a theory may please children; but it is poisoning their 
minds with lies, and is very bad for religion. But we know that this world is a 
degradation, that man is a degradation of God, and that Adam fell. There is no 
religion today that does not teach that man is a degradation. We have been 
degraded down to the animal, and are now going up, to emerge out of this 
bondage. But we shall never be able entirely to manifest the Infinite here. We 
shall struggle hard, but there will come a time when we shall find that it is 
impossible to be perfect here, while we are bound by the senses. And then the 
march back to our original state of Infinity will be sounded. 

This is renunciation. We shall have to get out of the difficulty by reversing the 
process by which we got in, and then morality and charity will begin. What is 
the watchword of all ethical codes? "Not I, but thou", and this "I" is the 
outcome of the Infinite behind, trying to manifest Itself on the outside world. 
This little "I" is the result, and it will have to go back and join the Infinite, its 
own nature. Every time you say, "Not I, my brother, but thou", you are trying 
to go back, and every time you say "I, and not thou", you take the false step of 
trying to manifest the Infinite through the sense-world. That brings struggles 
and evils into the world, but after a time renunciation must come, eternal 
renunciation. The little "I" is dead and gone. Why care so much for this little 
life? All these vain desires of living and enjoying this life, here or in some 
other place, bring death. 

If we are developed from animals, the animals also may be degraded men. How 
do you know it is not so? You have seen that the proof of evolution is simply 
this: you find a series of bodies from the lowest to the highest rising in a 
gradually ascending scale. But from that how can you insist that it is always 
from the lower upwards, and never from the higher downwards? The argument 
applies both ways, and if anything is true, I believe it is that the series is 
repeating itself in going up and down. How can you have evolution without 
involution? Our struggle for the higher life shows that we have been degraded 
from a high state. It must be so, only it may vary as to details. I always cling to 
the idea set forth with one voice by Christ, Buddha, and the Vedanta, that we 
must all come to perfection in time, but only by giving up this imperfection. 
This world is nothing. It is at best only a hideous caricature, a shadow of the 
Reality. We must go to the Reality. Renunciation will take us to It. 


Renunciation is the very basis of our true life; every moment of goodness and 
real life that we enjoy is when we do not think of ourselves. This little separate 
self must die. Then we shall find that we are in the Real, and that Reality is 
God, and He is our own true nature, and He is always in us and with us. Let us 
live in Him and stand in Him. It is the only joyful state of existence. Life on the 
plane of the Spirit is the only life, and let us all try to attain to this realisation. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER IX 
UNITY IN DIVERSITY 

{Delivered in London, 3rd November 1896) 

"The Self-existent One projected the senses outwards and, therefore, a man 
looks outward, not within himself. A certain wise one, desiring immortality, 
with inverted senses, perceived the Self within." As I have already said, the first 
inquiry that we find in the Vedas was concerning outward things, and then a 
new idea came that the reality of things is not to be found in the external world; 
not by looking outwards, but by turning the eyes, as it is literally expressed, 
inwards. And the word used for the Soul is very significant: it is He who has 
gone inward, the innermost reality of our being, the heart centre, the core, from 
which, as it were, everything comes out; the central sun of which the mind, the 
body, the sense-organs, and everything else we have are but rays going 
outwards. "Men of childish intellect, ignorant persons, run after desires which 
are external, and enter the trap of far-reaching death, but the wise, 
understanding immortality, never seek for the Eternal in this life of finite 
things." The same idea is here made clear that in this external world, which is 
full of finite things, it is impossible to see and find the Infinite. The Infinite 
must be sought in that alone which is infinite, and the only thing infinite about 
us is that which is within us, our own soul. Neither the body, nor the mind, not 
even our thoughts, nor the world we see around us, are infinite. The Seer, He to 
whom they all belong, the Soul of man. He who is awake in the internal man, 
alone is infinite, and to seek for the Infinite Cause of this whole universe we 
must go there. In the Infinite Soul alone we can find it. "What is here is there 
too, and what is there is here also. He who sees the manifold goes from death to 
death." We have seen how at first there was the desire to go to heaven. When 
these ancient Aryans became dissatisfied with the world around them, they 
naturally thought that after death they would go to some place where there 
would be all happiness without any misery; these places they multiplied and 
called Svargas — the word may be translated as heavens — where there would 
be joy for ever, the body would become perfect, and also the mind, and there 
they would live with their forefathers. But as soon as philosophy came, men 






found that this was impossible and absurd. The very idea of an infinite in place 
would be a contradiction in terms, as a place must begin and continue in time. 
Therefore they had to give up that idea. They found out that the gods who lived 
in these heavens had once been human beings on earth, who through their good 
works had become gods, and the godhoods, as they call them, were different 
states, different positions; none of the gods spoken of in the Vedas are 
permanent individuals. 

For instance, Indra and Vanina are not the names of certain persons, but the 
names of positions as governors and so on. The Indra who had lived before is 
not the same person as the Indra of the present day; he has passed away, and 
another man from earth has filled his place. So with all the other gods These are 
certain positions, which are filled successively by human souls who have raised 
themselves to the condition of gods, and yet even they die. In the old Rig-Veda 
we find the word "immortality" used with regard to these gods, but later on it is 
dropped entirely, for they found that immortality which is beyond time and 
space cannot be spoken of with regard to any physical form, however subtle it 
may be. However fine it may be, it must have a beginning in time and space, for 
the necessary factors that enter into the make-up of form are in space. Try to 
thinly of a form without space: it is impossible. Space is one of the materials, as 
it were, which make up the form, and this is continually changing Space and 
time are in Maya, and this idea is expressed in the line — "What is hole, that is 
there too." If there are these gods, they must be bound by the same laws that 
apply here, and all laws involve destruction and renewal again and again. These 
laws are moulding matter into different forms, and crushing them out again. 
Everything born must die; and so, if there are heavens, the same laws must hold 
good there. 

In this world we find that all happiness is followed by misery as its shadow. 

Life has its shadow, death. They must go together, because they are not 
contradictory, not two separate existences, but different manifestations of the 
same unit, life and death, sorrow and happiness, good and evil. The dualistic 
conception that good and evil are two separate entities, and that they are both 
going on eternally is absurd on the face of it. They are the diverse 
manifestations of one and the same fact, one time appearing as bad, and at 
another time as good. The difference does not exist in kind, but only in degree. 


They differ from each other in degree of intensity. We find as a fact that the 
same nerve systems carry good and bad sensations alike, and when the nerves 
are injured, neither sensation comes to us. If a certain nerve is paralysed, we do 
not get the pleasurable feelings that used to come along that wires and at the 
same time we do not get the painful feelings either. They are never two, but the 
same. Again, the same thing produces pleasure and pain at different times of 
life. The same phenomenon will produce pleasure in one, and pain in another. 
The eating of meat produces pleasure to a man, but pain to the animal which is 
eaten. There has never been anything which gives pleasure to all alike. Some 
are pleased, others displeased. So on it will go. Therefore, this duality of 
existence is denied. And what follows? I told you in my last lecture that we can 
never hate ultimately everything good on this earth and nothing bad. It may 
have disappointed and frightened some of you, but I cannot help it, and I am 
open to conviction when I am shown to the contrary; but until that can be 
proved to me, and I can find that it is true, cannot say so. 

The general argument against my statement, and apparently a very convincing 
one, is this that in the course of evolution, all that is evil in what we see around 
us is gradually being eliminated, and the result is that if this elimination 
continues for millions of years, a time will come when all the evil will have 
been extirpated, and the good alone will remain. This is apparently a very sound 
argument. Would to God it were true! But there is a fallacy in it, and it is this 
that it takes for granted that both good and evil are things that are eternally 
fixed. It takes for granted that there is a definite mass of evil, which may be 
represented by a hundred, and likewise of good, and that this mass of evil is 
being diminished every day, leaving only the good. But is it so? The history of 
the world shows that evil is a continuously increasing quantity, as well as good. 
Take the lowest man; he lives in the forest. His sense of enjoyment is very 
small, and so also is his power to suffer. His misery is entirely on the sense- 
plane. If he does not get plenty of food, he is miserable; but give him plenty of 
food and freedom to rove and to hunt, and he is perfectly happy. His happiness 
consists only in the senses, and so does his misery also. But if that man 
increases in knowledge, his happiness will increase, the intellect will open to 
him, and his sense-enjoyment will evolve into intellectual enjoyment. He will 
feel pleasure in reading a beautiful poem, and a mathematical problem will be 
of absorbing interest to him. But, with these, the inner nerves will become more 


and more susceptible to miseries of mental pain, of which the savage does not 
think. Take a very simple illustration. In Tibet there is no marriage, and there is 
no jealousy, yet we know that marriage is a much higher state. The Tibetans 
have not known the wonderful enjoyment, the blessing of chastity, the 
happiness of having a chaste, virtuous wife, or a chaste, virtuous husband. 

These people cannot feel that. And similarly they do not feel the intense 
jealousy of the chaste wife or husband, or the misery caused by unfaithfulness 
on either side, with all the heart-burnings and sorrows which believers in 
chastity experience. On one side, the latter gain happiness, but on the other, they 
suffer misery too. 

Take your country which is the richest in the world, and which is more 
luxurious than any other, and see how intense is the misery, how many more 
lunatics you have, compared with other races, only because the desires are so 
keen. A man must keep up a high standard of living, and the amount of money 
he spends in one year would be a fortune to a man in India. You cannot preach 
to him of simple living because society demands so much of him. The wheel of 
society is rolling on; it stops not for the widow's tears or the orphans' wails. 

This is the state of things everywhere. Your sense of enjoyment is developed, 
your society is very much more beautiful than some others. You have so many 
more things to enjoy. But those who have fewer have much less misery. You 
can argue thus throughout, the higher the ideal you have in the brain, the greater 
is your enjoyment, and the more profound your misery. One is like the shadow 
of the other. That the evils are being eliminated may be true, but if so, the good 
also must be dying out. But are not evils multiplying fast, and good 
diminishing, if I may so put it? If good increases in arithmetical progression, 
evil increase m geometrical progression. And this is Maya. This is neither 
optimism nor pessimism. Vedanta does not take he position that this world is 
only a miserable one. That would be untrue. At the same time, it is a mistake o 
say that this world is full of happiness and blessings. So it is useless to tell 
children that this world is all good, all flowers, all milk and honey. That is what 
we have all dreamt. At the same time it is erroneous to think, because one man 
has suffered more than another, that all is evil. It is this duality, this play of 
good and evil that makes our world of experiences. At the same time the 
Vedanta says, "Do not think that good and evil are two, are two separate 
essences, for they are one and the same thing, appearing in different degrees and 


in different guises and producing differences of feeling in the same mind." So, 
the first thought of the Vedanta is the finding of unity in the external; the One 
Existence manifesting Itself, however different It may appear in manifestation. 
Think of the old crude theory of the Persians — two gods creating this world, 
the good god doing everything that is good, and the bad one, everything bad. On 
the very face of it, you see the absurdity, for if it be carried out, every law of 
nature must have two parts, one of which is manipulated by one god, and then 
he goes away and the other god manipulates the other part. There the difficulty 
comes that both are working in the same world, and these two gods keep 
themselves in harmony by injuring one portion and doing good to another. This 
is a crude case, of course, the crudest way of expressing the duality of existence. 
But, take the more advanced, the more abstract theory that this world is partly 
good and partly bad. This also is absurd, arguing from the same standpoint. It is 
the law of unity that gives us our food, and it is the same law that kills many 
through accidents or misadventure. 

We find, then, that this world is neither optimistic nor pessimistic; it is a 
mixture of both, and as we go on we shall find that the whole blame is taken 
away from nature and put upon our own shoulders. At the same time the 
Vedanta shows the way out, but not by denial of evil, because it analyses boldly 
the fact as it is and does not seek to conceal anything. It is not hopeless; it is not 
agnostic. It finds out a remedy, but it wants to place that remedy on adamantine 
foundations: not by shutting the child's mouth and blinding its eyes with 
something which is untrue, and which the child will find out in a few days. I 
remember when I was young, a young man's father died and left him poorly off, 
with a large family to support, and he found that his father's friends were 
unwilling to help him. He had a conversation with a clergyman who offered this 
consolation, "Oh, it is all good, all is sent for our good." That is the old method 
of trying to put a piece of gold leaf on an old sore. It is a confession of 
weakness, of absurdity. The young man went away, and six months afterwards a 
son was bom to the clergyman, and he gave a thanksgiving party to which the 
young man was invited. The clergyman prayed, "Thank God for His mercies." 
And the young man stood up and said, "Stop, this is all misery." The clergyman 
asked, "Why?" "Because when my father died you said it was good, though 
apparently evil; so now, this is apparently good, but really evil." Is this the way 
to cure the misery of the world? Be good and have mercy on those who suffer. 



Do not try to patch it up, nothing will cure this world; go beyond it. 

This is a world of good and evil. Wherever there is good, evil follows, but 
beyond and behind all these manifestations, all these contradictions, the 
Vedanta finds out that Unity. It says, "Give up what is evil and give up what is 
good." What remains then? Behind good and evil stands something which is 
yours, the real you, beyond every evil, and beyond every good too, and it is that 
which is manifesting itself as good and bad. Know that first, and then and then 
alone you will be a true optimist, and not before; for then you will be able to 
control everything. Control these manifestations and you will be at liberty to 
manifest the real "you". First be master of yourself, stand up and be free, go 
beyond the pale of these laws, for these laws do not absolutely govern you, they 
are only part of your being. First find out that you are not the slave of nature, 
never were and never will be; that this nature, infinite as you may think it, is 
only finite, a drop in the ocean, and your Soul is the ocean; you are beyond the 
stars, the sun, and the. They are like mere bubbles compared with your infinite 
being. Know that, and you will control both good and evil. Then alone the 
whole vision will change and you will stand up and say, "How beautiful is good 
and how wonderful is evil!" 

That is what the Vedanta teaches. It does not propose any slipshod remedy by 
covering wounds with gold leaf and the more the wound festers, putting on 
more gold leaf. This life is a hard fact; work your way through it boldly, though 
it may be adamantine; no matter, the soul is stronger. It lays no responsibility on 
little gods; for you are the makers of your own fortunes. You make yourselves 
suffer, you make good and evil, and it is you who put your hands before your 
eyes and say it is dark. Take your hands away and see the light; you are 
effulgent, you are perfect already, from the very beginning. We now understand 
the verse: "He goes from death to death who sees the many here." See that One 
and be free. 

How are we to see it? This mind, so deluded, so weak, so easily led, even this 
mind can be strong and may catch a glimpse of that knowledge, that Oneness, 
which saves us from dying again and again. As rain falling upon a mountain 
flows in various streams down the sides of the mountain, so all the energies 
which you see here are from that one Unit. It has become manifold falling upon 


Maya. Do not run after the manifold; go towards the One. "He is in all that 
moves; He is in all that is pure; He fills the universe; He is in the sacrifice; He is 
the guest in the house; He is in man, in water, in animals, in truth; He is the 
Great One. As fire coming into this world is manifesting itself in various forms, 
even so, that one Soul of the universe is manifesting Himself in all these various 
forms. As air coming into this universe manifests itself in various forms, even 
so, the One Soul of all souls, of all beings, is manifesting Himself in all forms." 
This is true for you when you have understood this Unity, and not before Then 
is all optimism, because He is seen everywhere. The question is that if all this 
be true that that Pure One — the Self, the Infinite — has entered all this, how is 
it that He suffers, how is it that He becomes miserable, impure? He does not, 
says the Upanishad. "As the sun is the cause of the eyesight of every being, yet 
is not made defective by the defect in any eye, even so the Self of all is not 
affected by the miseries of the body, or by any misery that is around you." I 
may have some disease and see everything yellow, but the sun is not affected by 
it. "He is the One, the Creator of all, the Ruler of all, the Internal Soul of every 
being — He who makes His Oneness manifold. Thus sages who realise Him as 
the Soul of their souls, unto them belongs eternal peace; unto none else, unto 
none else. He who in this world of evanescence finds Him who never changes, 
he who in this universe of death finds that One Life, he who in this manifold 
finds that Oneness, and all those who realise Him as the Soul of their souls, to 
them belongs eternal peace; unto none else, unto none else. Where to find Him 
in the external world, where to find Him in the suns, and moons, and stars? 
There the sun cannot illumine, nor the moon, nor the stars, the flash of lightning 
cannot illumine the place; what to speak of this mortal fire? He shining, 
everything else shines. It is His light that they have borrowed, and He is shining 
through them." Here is another beautiful simile. Those of you who have been in 
India and have seen how the banyan tree comes from one root and spreads itself 
far around, will understand this. He is that banyan tree; He is the root of all and 
has branched out until He has become this universe, and however far He 
extends, every one of these trunks and branches is connected. 

Various heavens are spoken of in the Brahmana portions of the Vedas, but the 
philosophical teaching of the Upanishads gives up the idea of going to heaven. 
Happiness is not in this heaven or in that heaven, it is in the soul; places do not 
signify anything. Here is another passage which shows the different states of 



realisation "In the heaven of the forefathers, as a man sees things in a dream, so 
the Real Truth is seen." As in dreams we see things hazy and not so distinct, so 
we see the Reality there. There is another heaven called the Gandharva, in 
which it is still less clear; as a man sees his own reflection in the water, so is the 
Reality seen there. The highest heaven, of which the Hindus conceive is called 
the Brahmaloka; and in this, the Truth is seen much more clearly, like light and 
shade, but not yet quite distinctly. But as a man sees his own face in a mirror, 
perfect, distinct, and clear, so is the Truth shining in the soul of man. The 
highest heaven, therefore, is in our own souls; the greatest temple of worship is 
the human soul, greater than all heavens, says the Vedanta; for in no heaven 
anywhere, can we understand the reality as distinctly and clearly as in this life, 
in our own soul. Changing places does not help one much. I thought while I was 
in India that the cave would give me clearer vision. I found it was not so. Then I 
thought the forest would do so, then, Varanasi. But the same difficulty existed 
everywhere, because we make our own worlds. If I am evil, the whole world is 
evil to me. That is what the Upanishad says. And the same thing applies to all 
worlds. If I die and go to heaven, I should find the same, for until I am pure it is 
no use going to caves, or forests, or to Varanasi, or to heaven, and if I have 
polished my mirror, it does not matter where I live, I get the Reality just as It is. 
So it is useless, running hither and thither, and spending energy in vain, which 
should be spent only in polishing the mirror. The same idea is expressed again: 
"None sees Him, none sees His form with the eyes. It is in the mind, in the pure 
mind, that He is seen, and this immortality is gained." 

Those who were at the summer lectures on Raj a-Yoga will be interested to 
know that what was taught then was a different kind of Yoga. The Yoga which 
we are now considering consists chiefly in controlling the senses. When the 
senses are held as slaves by the human soul, when they can no longer disturb 
the mind, then the Yogi has reached the goal. "When all vain desires of the 
heart have been given up, then this very mortal becomes immortal, then he 
becomes one with God even here. When all the knots of the heart are cut 
asunder, then the mortal becomes immortal, and he enjoys Brahman here." 

Here, on this earth, nowhere else. 

A few words ought to be said here. You will generally hear that this Vedanta, 
this philosophy and other Eastern systems, look only to something beyond. 


letting go the enjoyments and struggle of this life. This idea is entirely wrong. It 
is only ignorant people who do not know anything of Eastern thought, and 
never had brain enough to understand anything of its real teaching, that tell you 
so. On the contrary, we read in our scriptures that our philosophers do not want 
to go to other worlds, but depreciate them as places where people weep and 
laugh for a little while only and then die. As long as we are weak we shall have 
to go through these experiences; but whatever is true, is here, and that is the 
human soul. And this also is insisted upon, that by committing suicide, we 
cannot escape the inevitable; we cannot evade it. But the right path is hard to 
find. The Hindu is just as practical as the Western, only we differ in our views 
of life. The one says, build a good house, let us have good clothes and food, 
intellectual culture, and so on, for this is the whole of life; and in that he is 
immensely practical. But the Hindu says, true knowledge of the world means 
knowledge of the soul, metaphysics; and he wants to enjoy that life. In America 
there was a great agnostic, a very noble man, a very good man, and a very fine 
speaker. He lectured on religion, which he said was of no use; why bother our 
heads about other worlds? He employed this simile; we have an orange here, 
and we want to squeeze all the juice out of it. I met him once and said, "I agree 
with you entirely. I have some fruit, and I too want to squeeze out the juice. Our 
difference lies in the choice of the fruit. You want an orange, and I prefer a 
mango. You think it is enough to live here and eat and drink and have a little 
scientific knowledge; but you have no right to say that that will suit all tastes. 
Such a conception is nothing to me. If I had only to learn how an apple falls to 
the ground, or how an electric current shakes my nerves, I would commit 
suicide. I want to understand the heart of things, the very kernel itself. Your 
study is the manifestation of life, mine is the life itself. My philosophy says you 
must know that and drive out from your mind all thoughts of heaven and hell 
and all other superstitions, even though they exist in the same sense that this 
world exists. I must know the heart of this life, its very essence, what it is, not 
only how it works and what are its manifestations. I want the why of everything, 
I leave the how to children. As one of your countrymen said, 'While I am 
smoking a cigarette, if I were to write a book, it would be the science of the 
cigarette.' It is good and great to be scientific, God bless them in their search; 
but when a man says that is all, he is talking foolishly, not caring to know the 
raison d'etre of life, never studying existence itself. I may argue that all your 
knowledge is nonsense, without a basis. You are studying the manifestations of 


life, and when I ask you what life is, you say you do not know. You are 
welcome to your study, but leave me to mine." 

I am practical, very practical, in my own way. So your idea that only the West is 
practical is nonsense. You are practical in one way, and I in another. There are 
different types of men and minds. If in the East a man is told that he will find 
out the truth by standing on one leg all his life, he will pursue that method. If in 
the West men hear that there is a gold mine somewhere in an uncivilised 
country, thousands will face the dangers there, in the hope of getting the gold; 
and, perhaps, only one succeeds. The same men have heard that they have souls 
but are content to leave the care of them to the church. The first man will not go 
near the savages, he says it may be dangerous. But if we tell him that on the top 
of a high mountain lives a wonderful sage who can give him knowledge of the 
soul, he tries to climb up to him, even if he be killed in the attempt. Both types 
of men are practical, but the mistake lies in regarding this world as the whole of 
life. Yours is the vanishing point of enjoyment of the senses — there is nothing 
permanent in it, it only brings more and more misery — while mine brings 
eternal peace. 

I do not say your view is wrong, you are welcome to it. Great good and blessing 
come out of it, but do not, therefore, condemn my view. Mine also is practical 
in its own way. Let us all work on our own plans. Would to God all of us were 
equally practical on both sides. I have seen some scientists who were equally 
practical, both as scientists and as spiritual men, and it is my great hope that in 
course of time the whole of humanity will be efficient in the same manner. 
When a kettle of water is coming to the boil, if you watch the phenomenon, you 
find first one bubble rising, and then another and so on, until at last they all join, 
and a tremendous commotion takes place. This world is very similar. Each 
individual is like a bubble, and the nations, resemble many bubbles. Gradually 
these nations are joining, and I am sure the day will come when separation will 
vanish and that Oneness to which we are all going will become manifest. A time 
must come when every man will be as intensely practical in the scientific world 
as in the spiritual, and then that Oneness, the harmony of Oneness, will pervade 
the whole world. The whole of mankind will become Jivanmuktas — free 
whilst living. We are all struggling towards that one end through our jealousies 
and hatreds, through our love and co-operation. A tremendous stream is flowing 



towards the ocean carrying us all along with it; and though like straws and 
scraps of paper we may at times float aimlessly about, in the long run we are 
sure to join the Ocean of Life and Bliss. 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER X 

THE FREEDOM OF THE SOUL 

{Delivered in London, 5th November 1896) 

The Katha Upanishad, which we have been studying, was written much later 
than that to which we now turn — the Chhandogya. The language is more 
modern, and the thought more organised. In the older Upanishads the language 
is very archaic, like that of the hymn portion of the Vedas, and one has to wade 
sometimes through quite a mass of unnecessary things to get at the essential 
doctrines. The ritualistic literature about which I told you which forms the 
second division of the Vedas, has left a good deal of its mark upon this old 
Upanishad, so that more than half of it is still ritualistic. There is, however, one 
great gain in studying the very old Upanishads. You trace, as it were, the 
historical growth of spiritual ideas. In the more recent Upanishads, the spiritual 
ideas have been collected and brought into one place; as in the Bhagavad Gita, 
for instance, which we may, perhaps, look upon as the last of the Upanishads, 
you do not find any inkling of these ritualistic ideas. The Gita is like a bouquet 
composed of the beautiful flowers of spiritual truths collected from the 
Upanishads. But in the Gita you cannot study the rise of the spiritual ideas, you 
cannot trace them to their source. To do that, as has been pointed out by many, 
you must study the Vedas. The great idea of holiness that has been attached to 
these books has preserved them, more than any other book in the world, from 
mutilation. In them, thoughts at their highest and at their lowest have all been 
preserved, the essential and the non-essential, the most ennobling teachings and 
the simplest matters of detail stand side by side; for nobody has dared to touch 
them. Commentators came and tried to smooth them down and to bring out 
wonderful new ideas from the old things; they tried to find spiritual ideas in 
even the most ordinary statements, but the texts remained, and as such, they are 
the most wonderful historical study. We all know that in the scriptures of every 
religion changes were made to suit the growing spirituality of later times; one 
word was changed here and another put in there, and so on. This, probably, has 
not been done with the Vedic literature, or if ever done, it is almost 
imperceptible. So we have this great advantage, we are able to study thoughts 







in their original significance, to note how they developed, how from 
materialistic ideas finer and finer spiritual ideas are evolved, until they attained 
their greatest height in the Vedanta. Descriptions of some of the old manners 
and customs are also there, but they do not appear much in the Upanishads. The 
language used is peculiar, terse, mnemonic. 

The writers of these books simply jotted down these lines as helps to remember 
certain facts which they supposed were already well known. In a narrative, 
perhaps, which they are telling, they take it for granted that it is well known to 
everyone they are addressing. Thus a great difficulty arises, we scarcely know 
the real meaning of any one of these stories, because the traditions have nearly 
died out, and the little that is left of them has been very much exaggerated. 
Many new interpretations have been put upon them, so that when you find 
them in the Puranas they have already become lyrical poems. Just as in the 
West, we find this prominent fact in the political development of Western races 
that they cannot bear absolute rule, that they are always trying to prevent any 
one man from ruling over them, and are gradually advancing to higher and 
higher democratic ideas, higher and higher ideas of physical liberty, so, in 
Indian metaphysics, exactly the same phenomenon appears in the development 
of spiritual life. The multiplicity of gods gave place to one God of the universe, 
and in the Upanishads there is a rebellion even against that one God. Not only 
was the idea of many governors of the universe ruling their destinies 
unbearable, but it was also intolerable that there should be one person ruling 
this universe. This is the first thing that strikes us. The idea grows and grows, 
until it attains its climax. In almost all of the Upanishads, we find the climax 
coming at the last, and that is the dethroning of this God of the universe. The 
personality of God vanishes, the impersonality comes. God is no more a 
person, no more a human being, however magnified and exaggerated, who 
rules this universe, but He has become an embodied principle in every being, 
immanent in the whole universe. It would be illogical to go from the Personal 
God to the Impersonal, and at the same time to leave man as a person. So the 
personal man is broken down, and man as principle is built up. The person is 
only a phenomenon, the principle is behind it. Thus from both sides, 
simultaneously, we find the breaking down of personalities and the approach 
towards principles, the Personal God approaching the Impersonal, the personal 
man approaching the Impersonal Man. Then come the succeeding stages of the 


gradual convergence of the two advancing lines of the Impersonal God and the 
Impersonal Man. And the Upanishads embody the stages through which these 
two lines at last become one, and the last word of each Upanishad is, "Thou art 
That". There is but One Eternally Blissful Principle, and that One is 
manifesting Itself as all this variety. 

Then came the philosophers. The work of the Upanishads seems to have ended 
at that point; the next was taken up by the philosophers. The framework was 
given them by the Upanishads, and they had to fill in the details. So, many 
questions would naturally arise. Taking for granted that there is but One 
Impersonal Principle which is manifesting Itself in all these manifold forms, 
how is it that the One becomes many? It is another way of putting the same old 
question which in its crude form comes into the human heart as the inquiry into 
the cause of evil and so forth. Why does evil exist in the world, and what is its 
cause? But the same question has now become refined, abstracted. No more is 
it asked from the platform of the senses why we are unhappy, but from the 
platform of philosophy. How is it that this One Principle becomes manifold? 
And the answer, as we have seen, the best answer that India has produced is the 
theory of Maya which says that It really has not become manifold, that It really 
has not lost any of Its real nature. Manifoldness is only apparent. Man is only 
apparently a person, but in reality he is the Impersonal Being. God is a person 
only apparently, but really He is the Impersonal Being. 

Even in this answer there have been succeeding stages, and philosophers have 
varied in their opinions. All Indian philosophers did not admit this theory of 
Maya. Possibly most of them did not. There are dualists, with a crude sort of 
dualism, who would not allow the question to be asked, but stifled it at its very 
birth. They said, "You have no right to ask such a question, you have no right 
to ask for an explanation; it is simply the will of God, and we have to submit to 
it quietly. There is no liberty for the human soul. Everything is predestined — 
what we shall do, have, enjoy, and suffer; and when suffering comes, it is our 
duty to endure it patiently; if we do not, we shall be punished all the more. 

How do we know that? Because the Vedas say so." And thus they have their 
texts and their meanings and they want to enforce them. 

There are others who, though not admitting the Maya theory, stand midway. 


They say that the whole of this creation forms, as it were, the body of God. 

God is the Soul of all souls and of the whole of nature. In the case of individual 
souls, contraction comes from evil doing. When a man does anything evil, his 
soul begins to contract and his power is diminished and goes on decreasing, 
until he does good works, when it expands again. One idea seems to be 
common in all the Indian systems, and I think, in every system in the world, 
whether they know it or not, and that is what I should call the divinity of man. 
There is no one system in the world, no real religion, which does not hold the 
idea that the human soul, whatever it be, or whatever its relation to God, is 
essentially pure and perfect, whether expressed in the language of mythology, 
allegory, or philosophy. Its real nature is blessedness and power, not weakness 
and misery. Somehow or other this misery has come. The crude systems may 
call it a personified evil, a devil, or an Ahriman, to explain how this misery 
came. Other systems may try to make a God and a devil in one, who makes 
some people miserable and others happy, without any reason whatever. Others 
again, more thoughtful, bring in the theory of Maya and so forth. But one fact 
stands out clearly, and it is with this that we have to deal. After all, these 
philosophical ideas and systems are but gymnastics of the mind, intellectual 
exercises. The one great idea that to me seems to be clear, and comes out 
through masses of superstition in every country and in every religion, is the one 
luminous idea that man is divine, that divinity is our nature. 

Whatever else comes is a mere superimposition, as the Vedanta calls it. 
Something has been superimposed, but that divine nature never dies. In the 
most degraded as well as in the most saintly it is ever present. It has to be 
called out, and it will work itself out. We have to ask. and it will manifest itself. 
The people of old knew that fire lived in the flint and in dry wood, but friction 
was necessary to call it out. So this fire of freedom and purity is the nature of 
every soul, and not a quality, because qualities can be acquired and therefore 
can be lost. The soul is one with Freedom, and the soul is one with Existence, 

A. 

and the soul is one with Knowledge. The Sat-Chit-Ananda — Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss Absolute — is the nature, the birthright of the Soul, and all 
the manifestations that we see are Its expressions, dimly or brightly manifesting 
Itself. Even death is but a manifestation of that Real Existence. Birth and death, 
life and decay, degeneration and regeneration — are all manifestations of that 
Oneness. So, knowledge, however it manifests itself, either as ignorance or as 





learning, is but the manifestation of that same Chit, the essence of knowledge; 
the difference is only in degree, and not in kind. The difference in knowledge 
between the lowest worm that crawls under our feet and the highest genius that 
the world may produce is only one of degree, and not of kind. The Vedantin 
thinker boldly says that the enjoyments in this life, even the most degraded 
joys, are but manifestations of that One Divine Bliss, the Essence of the Soul. 

This idea seems to be the most prominent in Vedanta, and, as I have said, it 
appears to me that every religion holds it. I have yet to know the religion which 
does not. It is the one universal idea working through all religions. Take the 
Bible for instance. You find there the allegorical statement that the first man 
Adam was pure, and that his purity was obliterated by his evil deeds 
afterwards. It is clear from this allegory that they thought that the nature of the 
primitive man was perfect. The impurities that we see, the weaknesses that we 
feel, are but superimpositions on that nature, and the subsequent history of the 
Christian religion shows that they also believe in the possibility, nay, the 
certainty of regaining that old state. This is the whole history of the Bible, Old 
and New Testaments together. So with the Mohammedans: they also believed 
in Adam and the purity of Adam, and through Mohammed the way was opened 
to regain that lost state. So with the Buddhists: they believe in the state called 
Nirvana which is beyond this relative world. It is exactly the same as the 
Brahman of the Vedantins, and the whole system of the Buddhists is founded 
upon the idea of regaining that lost state of Nirvana. In every system we find 
this doctrine present, that you cannot get anything which is not yours already. 
You are indebted to nobody in this universe. You claim your own birthright, as 
it has been most poetically expressed by a great Vedantin philosopher, in the 
title of one of his books — "The attainment of our own empire". That empire is 
ours; we have lost it and we have to regain it. The MayavMin, however, says 
that this losing of the empire was a hallucination; you never lost it. This is the 
only difference. 

Although all the systems agree so far that we had the empire, and that we have 
lost it, they give us varied advice as to how to regain it. One says that you must 
perform certain ceremonies, pay certain sums of money to certain idols, eat 
certain sorts of food, live in a peculiar fashion to regain that empire. Another 
says that if you weep and prostrate yourselves and ask pardon of some Being 



beyond nature, you will regain that empire. Again, another says if you love 
such a Being with all your heart, you will regain that empire. All this varied 
advice is in the Upanishads. As I go on, you will find it so. But the last and the 
greatest counsel is that you need not weep at all. You need not go through all 
these ceremonies, and need not take any notice of how to regain your empire, 
because you never lost it. Why should you go to seek for what you never lost? 
You are pure already, you are free already. If you think you are free, free you 
are this moment, and if you think you are bound, bound you will be. This is a 
very bold statement, and as I told you at the beginning of this course, I shall 
have to speak to you very boldly. It may frighten you now, but when you think 
over it, and realise it in your own life, then you will come to know that what I 
say is true. For, supposing that freedom is not your nature, by no manner of 
means can you become free. Supposing you were free and in some way you 
lost that freedom, that shows that you were not free to begin with. Had you 
been free, what could have made you lose it? The independent can never be 
made dependent; if it is really dependent, its independence was a hallucination. 

Of the two sides, then, which will you take? If you say that the soul was by its 
own nature pure and free, it naturally follows that there was nothing in this 
universe which could make it bound or limited. But if there was anything in 
nature which could bind the soul, it naturally follows that it was not free, and 
your statement that it was free is a delusion. So if it is possible for us to attain 
to freedom, the conclusion is inevitable that the soul is by its nature free. It 
cannot be otherwise. Freedom means independence of anything outside, and 
that means that nothing outside itself could work upon it as a cause. The soul is 
causeless, and from this follow all the great ideas that we have. You cannot 
establish the immortality of the soul, unless you grant that it is by its nature 
free, or in other words, that it cannot be acted upon by anything outside. For 
death is an effect produced by some outside cause. I drink poison and I die, 
thus showing that my body can be acted upon by something outside that is 
called poison. But if it be true that the soul is free, it naturally follows that 
nothing can affect it, and it can never die. Freedom, immortality, blessedness, 
all depend upon the soul being beyond the law of causation, beyond this Maya. 
Of these two which will you take? Either make the first a delusion, or make the 
second a delusion. Certainly I will make the second a delusion. It is more 
consonant with all my feelings and aspirations. I am perfectly aware that I am 


free by nature, and I will not admit that this bondage is true and my freedom a 
delusion. 

This discussion goes on in all philosophies, in some form or other. Even in the 
most modern philosophies you find the same discussion arising. There are two 
parties. One says that there is no soul, that the idea of soul is a delusion 
produced by the repeated transit of particles or matter, bringing about the 
combination which you call the body or brain; that the impression of freedom 
is the result of the vibrations and motions and continuous transit of these 
particles. There were Buddhistic sects who held the same view and illustrated it 
by this example: If young take a torch and whirl it round rapidly, there will be a 
circle of light. That circle does not really exist, because the torch is changing 
place every moment. We are but bundles of little particles, which in their rapid 
whirling produce the delusion of a permanent soul. The other party states that 
in the rapid succession of thought, matter occurs as a delusion, and does not 
really exist. So we see one side claiming that spirit is a delusion and the other, 
that matter is a delusion. Which side will you take? Of course, we will take the 
spirit and deny matter. The arguments are similar for both, only on the spirit 
side the argument is little stronger. For nobody has ever seen what matter is. 

We can only feel ourselves. I never knew a man who could feel matter outside 
of himself. Nobody was ever able to jump outside of himself. Therefore the 
argument is a little stronger on the side of the spirit. Secondly, the spirit theory 
explains the universe, whiles materialism does not. Hence the materialistic 
explanation is illogical. If you boil down all the philosophies and analyse them, 
you will find that they are reduced to one; or the other of these two positions. 

So here, too, in a more intricate form, in a more philosophical form, we find the 
same question about natural purity and freedom. Ones side says that the first is 
a delusion, and the other, that the second is a delusion. And, of course, we side 
with the second, in believing that our bondage is a delusion. 

The solution of the Vedanta is that we are not bound, we are free already. Not 
only so, but to say or to think that we are bound is dangerous — it is a mistake, 
it is self-hypnotism. As soon as you say, "I am bound," "I am weak," "I am 
helpless," woe unto you; you rivet one more chain upon yourself. Do not say it, 
do not think it. I have heard of a man who lived in a forest and used to repeat 
day and night, "Shivoham" — I am the Blessed One — and one day a tiger fell 



upon him and dragged him away to kill him; people on the other side of the 
river saw it, and heard the voice so long as voice remained in him, saying, 
"Shivoham" — even in the very jaws of the tiger. There have been many such 
men. There have been cases of men who, while being cut to pieces, have 
blessed their enemies. "I am He, I am He; and so art thou. I am pure and perfect 
and so are all my enemies. You are He, and so am I." That is - the position of 
strength. Nevertheless, there are great and wonderful things in the religions of 
the dualists; wonderful is the idea of the Personal God apart from nature, whom 
we worship and love. Sometimes this idea is very soothing. But, says the 
Vedanta, the soothing is something like the effect that comes from an opiate, 
not natural. It brings weakness in the long run, and what this world wants 
today, more than it ever did before, is strength. It is weakness, says the 
Vedanta, which is the cause of all misery in this world. Weakness is the one 
cause of suffering. We become miserable because we are weak. We lie, steal, 
kill, and commit other crimes, because we are weak. We suffer because we are 
weak. We die because we are weak. Where there is nothing to weaken us, there 
is no death nor sorrow. We are miserable through delusion. Give up the 
delusion, and the whole thing vanishes. It is plain and simple indeed. Through 
all these philosophical discussions and tremendous mental gymnastics we come 
to this one religious idea, the simplest in the whole world. 

The monistic Vedanta is the simplest form in which you can put truth. To teach 
dualism was a tremendous mistake made in India and elsewhere, because 
people did not look at the ultimate principles, but only thought of the process 
which is very intricate indeed. To many, these tremendous philosophical and 
logical propositions were alarming. They thought these things could not be 
made universal, could not be followed in everyday practical life, and that under 
the guise of such a philosophy much laxity of living would arise. 

But I do not believe at all that monistic ideas preached to the world would 
produce immorality and weakness. On the contrary, I have reason to believe 
that it is the only remedy there is. If this be the truth, why let people drink ditch 
water when the stream of life is flowing by? If this be the truth, that they are all 
pure, why not at this moment teach it to the whole world? Why not teach it 
with the voice of thunder to every man that is born, to saints and sinners, men, 
women, and children, to the man on the throne and to the man sweeping the 


streets? 


It appears now a very big and a very great undertaking; to many it appears very 
startling, but that is because of superstition, nothing else. By eating all sorts of 
bad and indigestible food, or by starving ourselves, we are incompetent to eat a 
good meal. We have listened to words of weakness from our childhood. You 
hear people say that they do not believe in ghosts, but at the same time, there 
are very few who do not get a little creepy sensation in the dark. It is simply 
superstition. So with all religious superstitions There are people in this country 
who, if I told them there was no such being as the devil, will think all religion 
is gone. Many people have said to me, how can there be religion without a 
devil? How can there be religion without someone to direct us? How can we 
live without being ruled by somebody? We like to be so treated, because we 
have become used to it. We are not happy until we feel we have been 
reprimanded by somebody every day. The same superstition! But however 
terrible it may seem now, the time will come when we shall look back, each 
one of us, and smile at every one of those superstitions which covered the pure 
and eternal soul, and repeat with gladness, with truth, and with strength, I am 
free, and was free, and always will be free. This monistic idea will come out of 
Vedanta, and it is the one idea that deserves to live. The scriptures may perish 
tomorrow. Whether this idea first flashed into the brains of Hebrews or of 
people living in the Arctic regions, nobody cares. For this is the truth and truth 
is eternal; and truth itself teaches that it is not the special property of any 
individual or nation. Men, animals, and gods are all common recipients of this 
one truth. Let them all receive it. Why make life miserable? Why let people fall 
into all sorts of superstitions? I will give ten thousand lives, if twenty of them 
will give up their superstition. Not only in this country, but in the land of its 
very birth, if you tell people this truth, they are frightened. They say, "This idea 
is for Sannyasins who give up the world and live in forests; for them it is all 
right. But for us poor householders, we must all have some sort of fear, we 
must have ceremonies," and so on. 

Dualistic ideas have ruled the world long enough, and this is the result. Why 
not make a new experiment? It may take ages for all minds to receive monism, 
but why not begin now? If we have told it to twenty persons in our lives, we 
have done a great work. 


There is one idea which often militates against it. It is this. It is all very well to 
say, "I am the Pure, the Blessed," but I cannot show it always in my life. That 
is true; the ideal is always very hard. Every child that is born sees the sky 
overhead very far away, but is that any reason why we should not look towards 
the sky? Would it mend matters to go towards superstition? If we cannot get 
nectar, would it mend matters for us to drink poison? Would it be any help for 
us, because we cannot realise the truth immediately, to go into darkness and 
yield to weakness and superstition? 

I have no objection to dualism in many of its forms. I like most of them, but I 
have objections to every form of teaching which inculcates weakness. This is 
the one question I put to every man, woman, or child, when they are in 
physical, mental, or spiritual training. Are you strong? Do you feel strength? — 
for I know it is truth alone that gives strength. I know that truth alone gives life, 
and nothing but going towards reality will make us strong, and none will reach 
truth until he is strong. Every system, therefore, which weakens the mind, 
makes one superstitious, makes one mope, makes one desire all sorts of wild 
impossibilities, mysteries, and superstitions, I do not like, because its effect is 
dangerous. Such systems never bring any good; such things create morbidity in 
the mind, make it weak, so weak that in course of time it will be almost 
impossible to receive truth or live up to it. Strength, therefore, is the one thing 
needful. Strength is the medicine for the world's disease. Strength is the 
medicine which the poor must have when tyrannised over by the rich. Strength 
is the medicine that the ignorant must have when oppressed by the learned; and 
it is the medicine that sinners must have when tyrannised over by other sinners; 
and nothing gives such strength as this idea of monism. Nothing makes us so 
moral as this idea of monism. Nothing makes us work so well at our best and 
highest as when all the responsibility is thrown upon ourselves. I challenge 
everyone of you. How will you behave if I put a little baby in your hands? 

Your whole life will be changed for the moment; whatever you may be, you 
must become selfless for the time being. You will give up all your criminal 
ideas as soon as responsibility is thrown upon you — your whole character will 
change. So if the whole responsibility is thrown upon our own shoulders, we 
shall be at our highest and best; when we have nobody to grope towards, no 
devil to lay our blame upon, no Personal God to carry our burdens, when we 




are alone responsible, then we shall rise to our highest and best. I am 
responsible for my fate, I am the bringer of good unto myself, I am the bringer 
of evil. I am the Pure and Blessed One. We must reject all thoughts that assert 
the contrary. "I have neither death nor fear, I have neither caste nor creed, I 
have neither father nor mother nor brother, neither friend nor foe, for I am 
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute; I am the Blissful One, I am the 
Blissful One. I am not bound either by virtue or vice, by happiness or misery. 
Pilgrimages and books and ceremonials can never bind me. I have neither 
hunger nor thirst; the body is not mine, nor am I subject to the superstitions and 
decay that come to the body, I am Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute; I 
am the Blissful One, I am the Blissful One." 

This, says the Vedanta, is the only prayer that we should have. This is the only 
way to reach the goal, to tell ourselves, and to tell everybody else, that we are 
divine. And as we go on repeating this, strength comes. He who falters at first 
will get stronger and stronger, and the voice will increase in volume until the 
truth takes possession of our hearts, and courses through our veins, and 
permeates our bodies. Delusion will vanish as the light becomes more and 
more effulgent, load after load of ignorance will vanish, and then will come a 
time when all else has disappeared and the Sun alone shines. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XI 
THE COSMOS 

The Macrocosm 

{Delivered in New York, 19th January 1896) 

The flowers that we see all around .us are beautiful, beautiful is the rising of 
the morning sun, beautiful are the variegated hues of nature. The whole 
universe is beautiful, and man has been enjoying it since his appearance on 
earth. Sublime and awe-inspiring are the mountains; the gigantic rushing rivers 
rolling towards the sea, the trackless deserts, the infinite ocean, the starry 
heavens — all these are awe-inspiring, sublime, and beautiful indeed. The 
whole mass of existence which we call nature has been acting on the human 
mind since time immemorial. It has been acting on the thought of man, and as 
its reaction has come out the question: What are these, whence are they? As far 
back as the time of the oldest portion of that most ancient human composition, 
the Vedas, we find the same question asked: "Whence is this? When there was 
neither aught nor naught, and darkness was hidden in darkness, who projected 
this universe? How? Who knows the secret?" And the question has come down 
to us at the present time. Millions of attempts have been made to answer it, yet 
millions of times it will have to be answered again. It is not that each answer 
was a failure; every answer to this question contained a part of truth, and this 
truth gathers strength as time rolls on. I will try to present before you the 
outline of the answer that I have gathered from the ancient philosophers of 
India; in harmony with modern knowledge. 

We find that in this oldest of questions a few points had been already solved. 
The first is that there was a time when there was "neither aught nor naught", 
when this world did not exist; our mother earth with the seas and oceans, the 
rivers, and mountains, cities and villages human races, animals, plants, birds, 
and planets and luminaries, all this infinite variety of creation, had no 
existence. Are we sure of that? We will try to trace how this conclusion is 
arrived at. What does man see around him? Take a little plant. He puts a seed in 






the ground, and later, he finds a plant peep out, lift itself slowly above the 
ground, and grow and grow, till it becomes a gigantic tree. Then it dies, leaving 
only the seed. It completes the circle — it comes out of the seed, becomes the 
tree, and ends in the seed again. Look at a bird, how from the egg it springs, 
lives its life, and then dies, leaving other eggs, seeds of future birds. So with 
the animals, so with man. Everything in nature begins, as it were, from certain 
seeds, certain rudiments, certain fine forms, and becomes grosser and grosser, 
and develops, going on that way for a certain time, and then again goes back to 
that fine form, and subsides. The raindrop in which the beautiful sunbeam is 
playing was drawn in the form of vapour from the ocean, went far away into 
the air, and reached a region where it changed into water, and dropped down in 
its present form — to be converted into vapour again. So with everything in 
nature by which we are surrounded. We know that the huge mountains are 
being worked upon by glaciers and rivers, which are slowly but surely 
pounding them and pulverising them into sand, that drifts away into the ocean 
where it settles down on its bed, layer after layer, becoming hard as rocks, once 
more to be heaped up into mountains of a future generation. Again they will be 
pounded and pulverised, and thus the course goes on. From sand rise these 
mountains; unto sand they go. 

If it be true that nature is uniform throughout, if it be true, and so far no human 
experience has contradicted it, that the same method under which a small grain 
of sand is created, works in creating the gigantic suns and stars and all this 
universe, if it be true that the whole of this universe is built on exactly the same 
plan as the atom, if it be true that the same law prevails throughout the 
universe, then, as it has been said in the Vedas, "Knowing one lump of clay we 
know the nature of all the clay that is in the universe." Take up a little plant and 
study its life, and we know the universe as it is. If we know one grain of sand, 
we understand the secret of the whole universe. Applying this course of 
reasoning to phenomena, we find, in the first place, that everything is almost 
similar at the beginning and the end. The mountain comes from the sand, and 
goes back to the sand; the river comes out of vapour, and goes back to vapour; 
plant life comes from the seed, and goes back to the seed; human life comes out 
of human germs, and goes back to human germs. The universe with its stars 
and planets has come out of a nebulous state and must go back to it. What do 
we learn from this? That the manifested or the grosser state is the effect, and 


the finer state the cause. Thousands of years ago, it was demonstrated by 
Kapila, the great father of all philosophy, that destruction means going back to 
the cause. If this table here is destroyed, it will go back to its cause, to those 
fine forms and particles which, combined, made this form which we call a 
table. If a man dies, he will go back to the elements which gave him his body; 
if this earth dies, it will go back to the elements which gave it form. This is 
what is called destruction, going back to the cause. Therefore we learn that the 
effect is the same as the cause, not different. It is only in another form. This 
glass is an effect, and it had its cause, and this cause is present in this form. A 
certain amount of the material called glass plus the force in the hands of the 
manufacturer, are the causes, the instrumental and the material, which, 
combined, produced this form called a glass. The force which was in the hands 
of the manufacturer is present in the glass as the power of adhesion, without 
which the particles would fall apart; and the glass material is also present. The 
glass is only a manifestation of these fine causes in a new shape, and if it be 
broken to pieces, the force which was present in the form of adhesion will go 
back and join its own element, and the particles of glass will remain the same 
until they take new forms. 

Thus we find that the effect is never different from the cause. It is only that this 
effect is a reproduction of the cause in a grosser form. Next, we learn that all 
these particular forms which we call plants, animals, or men are being repeated 
ad infinitum, rising and falling. The seed produces the tree. The tree produces 
the seed, which again comes up as another tree, and so on and on; there is no 
end to it. Water-drops roll down the mountains into the ocean, and rise again as 
vapour, go back to the mountains and again come down to the ocean. So, rising 
and falling, the cycle goes on. So with all lives, so with all existence that we 
can see, feel, hear, or imagine. Everything that is within the bounds of our 
knowledge is proceeding in the same way, like breathing in and breathing out 
in the human body. Everything in creation goes on in this form, one wave 
rising, another falling, rising again, falling again. Each wave has its hollow, 
each hollow has its wave. The same law must apply to the universe taken as a 
whole, because of its uniformity. This universe must be resolved into its 
causes; the sun, moon, stars, and earth, the body and mind, and everything in 
this universe must return to their finer causes, disappear, be destroyed as it 
were. But they will live in the causes as fine forms. Out of these fine forms 


they will emerge again as new earths, suns, moons, and stars. 

There is one fact more to learn about this rising and falling. The seed comes out 
of the tree; it does not immediately become a tree, but has a period of 
inactivity, or rather, a period of very fine unmanifested action. The seed has to 
work for some time beneath the soil. It breaks into pieces, degenerates as it 
were, and regeneration comes out of that degeneration. In the beginning, the 
whole of this universe has to work likewise for a period in that minute form, 
unseen and unmanifested, which is called chaos, and; out of that comes a new 
projection. The whole period of one manifestation of this universe — its going 
down into the finer form, remaining there for some time, and coming out again 
— is, in Sanskrit, called a Kalpa or a Cycle. Next comes a very important 
question especially for modern; times. We see that the finer forms develop 
slowly and slowly, and gradually becomes grosser and grosser. We have seen 
that the cause is the same as the effect, and the effect is only the cause in 
another form. Therefore this whole universe cannot be produced out of nothing. 
Nothing comes without a cause, and the cause is the effect in another form. 

Out of what has this universe been produced then? From a preceding fine 
universe. Out of what has men been produced? The preceding fine form. Out of 
what has the tree been produced? Out of the seed; the whole of the tree was 
there in the seed. It comes out and becomes manifest. So, the whole of this 
universe has been created out of this very universe existing in a minute form. It 
has been made manifest now. It will go back to that minute form, and again 
will be made manifest. Now we find that the fine forms slowly come out and 
become grosser and grosser until they reach their limit, and when they reach 
their limit they go back further and further, becoming finer and finer again. 

This coming out of the fine and becoming gross, simply changing the 
arrangements of its parts, as it were, is what in modern times called evolution. 
This is very true, perfectly true; we see it in our lives. No rational man can 
possibly quarrel with these evolutionists. But we have to learn one thing more. 
We have to go one step further, and what is that? That every evolution is 
preceded by an involution. The seed is the father of the tree, but another tree 
was itself the father of the seed. The seed is the fine form out of which the big 
tree comes, and another big tree was the form which is involved in that seed. 
The whole of this universe was present in the cosmic fine universe. The little 



cell, which becomes afterwards the man, was simply the involved man and 
becomes evolved as a man. If this is clear, we have no quarrel with the 
evolutionists, for we see that if they admit this step, instead of their destroying 
religion, they will be the greatest supporters of it. 

We see then, that nothing can be created out of nothing. Everything exists 
through eternity, and will exist through eternity. Only the movement is in 
succeeding waves and hollows, going back to fine forms, and coming out into 
gross manifestations. This involution and evolution is going on throughout the 
whole of nature. The whole series of evolution beginning with the lowest 
manifestation of life and reaching up to the highest, the most perfect man, must 
have been the involution of something else. The question is: The involution of 
what? What was involved? God. The evolutionist will tell you that your idea 
that it was God is wrong. Why? Because you see God is intelligent, but we find 
that intelligence develops much later on in the course of evolution. It is in man 
and the higher animals that we find intelligence, but millions of years have 
passed in this world before this intelligence came. This objection of the 
evolutionists does not hold water, as we shall see by applying our theory. The 
tree comes out of the seed, goes back to the seed; the beginning and the end are 
the same. The earth comes out of its cause and returns to it. We know that if we 
can find the beginning we can find the end. E converse, if we find the end we 
can find the beginning. If that is so, take this whole evolutionary series, from 
the protoplasm at one end to the perfect man at the other, and this whole series 
is one life. In the end we find the perfect man, so in the beginning it must have 
been the same. Therefore, the protoplasm was the involution of the highest 
intelligence. You may not see it but that involved intelligence is what is 
uncoiling itself until it becomes manifested in the most perfect man. That can 
be mathematically demonstrated. If the law of conservation of energy is true, 
you cannot get anything out of a machine unless you put it in there first. The 
amount of work that you get out of an engine is exactly the same as you have 
put into it in the form of water and coal, neither more nor less. The work I am 
doing now is just what I put into me, in the shape of air, food, and other things. 
It is only a question of change and manifestation. There cannot be added in the 
economy of this universe one particle of matter or one foot-pound of force, nor 
can one particle of matter or one foot-pound of force be taken out. If that be the 
case, what is this intelligence? If it was not present in the protoplasm, it must 


have come all of a sudden, something coming out of nothing, which is absurd. 
It, therefore, follows absolutely that the perfect man, the free man, the God- 
man, who has gone beyond the laws of nature, and transcended everything, 
who has no more to go through this process of evolution, through birth and 
death, that man called the "Christ-man" by the Christians, and the "Buddha- 
man" by the Buddhists, and the "Free" by the Yogis — that perfect man who is 
at one end of the chain of evolution was involved in the cell of the protoplasm, 
which is at the other end of the same chain. 

Applying the same reason to the whole of the universe, we see that intelligence 
must be the Lord of creation, the cause. What is the most evolved notion that 
man has of this universe? It is intelligence, the adjustment of part to part, the 
display of intelligence, of which the ancient design theory was an attempt at 
expression. The beginning was, therefore, intelligence. At the beginning that 
intelligence becomes involved, and in the end that intelligence gets evolved. 
The sum total of the intelligence displayed in the universe must, therefore, be 
the involved universal intelligence unfolding itself. This universal intelligence 
is what we call God. Call it by any other name, it is absolutely certain that in 
the beginning there is that Infinite cosmic intelligence. This cosmic intelligence 
gets involved, and it manifests, evolves itself, until it becomes the perfect man, 
the "Christ-man," the "Buddha-man." Then it goes back to its own source. That 
is why all the scriptures say, "In Him we live and move and have our being." 
That is why all the scriptures preach that we come from God and go back to 
God. Do not be frightened by theological terms; if terms frighten you, you are 
not fit to be philosophers. This cosmic intelligence is what the theologians call 
God. 

I have been asked many times, "Why do you use that old word, God? " 

Because it is the best word for our purpose; you cannot find a better word than 
that, because all the hopes, aspirations, and happiness of humanity have been 
centred in that word. It is impossible now to change the word. Words like these 
were first coined by great saints who realised their import and understood their 
meaning. But as they become current in society, ignorant people take these 
words, and the result is that they lose their spirit and glory. The word God has 
been used from time immemorial, and the idea of this cosmic intelligence, and 
all that is great and holy, is associated with it. Do you mean to say that because 



some fool says it is not all right, we should throw it away? Another man may 
come and say, "Take my word," and another again, "Take my word." So there 
will be no end to foolish words. Use the old word, only use it in the true spirit, 
cleanse it of superstition, and realise fully what this great ancient word means. 
If you understand the power of the laws of association, you will know that 
these words are associated with innumerable majestic and powerful ideas; they 
have been used and worshipped by millions of human souls and associated by 
them with all that is highest and best, all that is rational, all that is lovable, and 
all that is great and grand in human nature. And they come as suggestions of 
these associations, and cannot be given up. If I tried to express all these by only 
telling you that God created the universe, it would have conveyed no meaning 
to you. Yet, after all this struggle, we have come back to Him, the Ancient and 
Supreme One. 

We now see that all the various forms of cosmic energy, such as matter, 
thought, force, intelligence and so forth, are simply the manifestations of that 
cosmic intelligence, or, as we shall call it henceforth, the Supreme Lord. 
Everything that you see, feel, or hear, the whole universe, is His creation, or to 
be a little more accurate, is His projection; or to be still more accurate, is the 
Lord Himself. It is He who is shining as the sun and the stars. He is the mother 
earth. He is the ocean Himself. He comes as gentle showers. He is the gentle air 
that we breathe in, and He it is who is working as force in the body. He is the 
speech that is uttered. He is the man who is talking. He is the audience that is 
here. He is the platform on which I stand. He is the light that enables me to see 
your faces. It is all He. He Himself is both the material and the efficient cause 
of this universe, and He it is that gets involved in the minute cell, and evolves 
at the other end and becomes God again. He it is that comes down and becomes 
the lowest atom, and slowly unfolding His nature, rejoins Himself. This is the 
mystery of the universe. "Thou art the man. Thou art the woman. Thou art the 
strong man walking in the pride of youth. Thou art the old man tottering on 
crutches. Thou art in everything. Thou art everything, O Lord." This is the only 
solution of the Cosmos that satisfies the human intellect. In one word, we are 
born of Him, we live in Him, and unto Him we return. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XI 
THE COSMOS 

The Microcosm 

{Delivered in New York, 26th January 1896) 

The human mind naturally wants to get outside, to peer out of the body, as it 
were, through the channels of the organs. The eye must see, the ear must hear, 
the senses must sense the external world — and naturally the beauties and 
sublimities of nature captivate the attention of man first. The first questions that 
arose in the human soul were about the external world. The solution of the 
mystery was asked of the sky, of the stars, of the heavenly bodies, of the earth, 
of the rivers, of the mountains, of the ocean; and in all ancient religions we find 
traces of how the groping human mind at first caught at everything external. 
There was a river-god, a sky-god, a cloud-god, a rain-god; everything external, 
all of which we now call the powers of nature, became metamorphosed, 
transfigured, into wills, into gods, into heavenly messengers. As the question 
went deeper and deeper, these external manifestations failed to satisfy the 
human mind, and finally the energy turned inward, and the question was asked 
of man's own soul. From the macrocosm the question was reflected back to the 
microcosm; from the external world the question was reflected to the internal. 
From analysing the external nature, man is led to analyse the internal; this 
questioning of the internal man comes with a higher state of civilisation, with a 
deeper insight into nature, with a higher state of growth. 

The subject of discussion this afternoon is this internal man. No question is so 
near and dear to man's heart as that of the internal man. How many millions of 
times, in how many countries has this question been asked! Sages and kings, 
rich and poor, saints and sinners, every man, every woman, all have from time 
to time asked this question. Is there nothing permanent in this evanescent 
human life? Is there nothing, they have asked, which does not die away when 
this body dies? Is there not something living when this frame crumbles into 
dust? Is there not something which survives the fire which burns the body into 







ashes? And if so, what is its destiny? Where does it go? Whence did it come? 
These questions have been asked again and again, and so long as this creation 
lasts, so long as there are human brains to think, this question will have to be 
asked. Yet, it is not that the answer did not come; each time the answer came, 
and as time rolls on, the answer will gain strength more and more. The question 
was answered once for all thousands of years ago, and through all subsequent 
time it is being restated, reillustrated, made clearer to our intellect. What we 
have to do, therefore, is to make a restatement of the answer. We do not 
pretend to throw any new light on those all-absorbing problems, but only to put 
before you the ancient truth in the language of modern times, to speak the 
thoughts of the ancients in the language of the moderns, to speak the thoughts 
of the philosophers in the language of the people, to speak the thoughts of the 
angels in the language of man, to speak the thoughts of God in the language of 
poor humanity, so that man will understand them; for the same divine essence 
from which the ideas emanated is ever present in man, and, therefore, he can 
always understand them. 

I am looking at you. How many things are necessary for this vision? First, the 
eyes. For if I am perfect in every other way, and yet have no eyes, I shall not be 
able to see you. Secondly, the real organ of vision. For the eyes are not the 
organs. They are but the instruments of vision, and behind them is the real 
organ, the nerve centre in the brain. If that centre be injured, a man may have 
the clearest pair of eyes, yet he will not be able to see anything. So, it is 
necessary that this centre, or the real organ, be there. Thus, with all our senses. 
The external ear is but the instrument for carrying the vibration of sound 
inward to the centre. Yet, that is not sufficient. Suppose in your library you are 
intently reading a book, and the clock strikes, yet you do not hear it. The sound 
is there, the pulsations in the air are there, the ear and the centre are also there, 
and these vibrations have been carried through the ear to the centre, and yet 
you do not hear it. What is wanting? The mind is not there. Thus we see that 
the third thing necessary is, that the mind must be there. First the external 
instruments, then the organ to which this external instrument will carry the 
sensation, and lastly the organ itself must be joined to the mind. When the mind 
is not joined to the organ, the organ and the ear may take the impression, and 
yet we shall not be conscious of it. The mind, too, is only the carrier; it has to 
carry the sensation still forward, and present it to the intellect. The intellect is 


the determining faculty and decides upon what is brought to it. Still this is not 
sufficient. The intellect must carry it forward and present the whole thing 
before the ruler in the body, the human soul, the king on the throne. Before him 
this is presented, and then from him comes the order, what to do or what not to 
do; and the order goes down in the same sequence to the intellect, to the mind, 
to the organs, and the organs convey it to the instruments, and the perception is 
complete. 

The instruments are in the external body, the gross body of man; but the mind 
and the intellect are not. They are in what is called in Hindu philosophy the 
finer body; and what in Christian theology you read of as the spiritual body of 
man; finer, very much finer than the body, and yet not the soul. This soul is 
beyond them all. The external body perishes in a few years; any simple cause 
may disturb and destroy it. The finer body is not so easily perishable; yet it 
sometimes degenerates, and at other times becomes strong. We see how, in the 
old man, the mind loses its strength, how, when the body is vigorous, the mind 
becomes vigorous, how various medicines and drugs affect it, how everything 
external acts on it, and how it reacts on the external world. Just as the body has 
its progress and decadence, so also has the mind, and, therefore, the mind is not 
the soul, because the soul can neither decay nor degenerate. How can we know 
that? How can we know that there is something behind this mind? Because 
knowledge which is self-illuminating and the basis of intelligence cannot 
belong to dull, dead matter. Never was seen any gross matter which had 
intelligence as its own essence. No dull or dead matter can illumine itself. It is 
intelligence that illumines all matter. This hall is here only through intelligence 
because, as a hall, its existence would be unknown unless some intelligence 
built it. This body is not self-luminous; if it were, it would be so in a dead man 
also. Neither can the mind nor the spiritual body be self-luminous. They are not 
of the essence of intelligence. That which is self-luminous cannot decay. The 
luminosity of that which shines through a borrowed light comes and goes; but 
that which is light itself, what can make that come and go, flourish and decay? 
We see that the moon waxes and wanes, because it shines through the 
borrowed light of the sun. If a lump of iron is put into the fire and made red- 
hot, it glows and shines, but its light will vanish, because it is borrowed. So, 
decadence is possible only of that light which is borrowed and is not of its own 


essence. 


Now we see that the body, the external shape, has no light as its own essence, 
is not self-luminous, and cannot know itself; neither can the mind. Why not? 
Because the mind waxes and wanes, because it is vigorous at one time and 
weak at another, because it can be acted upon by anything and everything. 
Therefore the light which shines through the mind is not its own. Whose is it 
then? It must belong to that which has it as its own essence, and as such, can 
never decay or die, never become stronger or weaker; it is self-luminous, it is 
luminosity itself. It cannot be that the soul knows, it is knowledge. It cannot be 
that the soul has existence, but it is existence. It cannot be that the soul is 
happy, it is happiness itself. That which is happy has borrowed its happiness; 
that which has knowledge has received its knowledge; and that which has 
relative existence has only a reflected existence. Wherever there are qualities 
these qualities have been reflected upon the substance, but the soul has not 
knowledge, existence, and blessedness as its qualities, they are the essence of 
the soul. 

Again, it may be asked, why shall we take this for granted? Why shall we 
admit that the soul has knowledge, blessedness, existence, as its essence, and 
has not borrowed them? It may be argued, why not say that the soul's 
luminosity, the soul's blessedness, the soul's knowledge, are borrowed in the 
same way as the luminosity of the body is borrowed from the mind? The 
fallacy of arguing in this way will be that there will be no limit. From whom 
were these borrowed? If we say from some other source, the same question will 
be asked again. So, at last we shall have to come to one who is self-luminous; 
to make matters short then, the logical way is to stop where we get self¬ 
luminosity, and proceed no further. 

We see, then, that this human being is composed first of this external covering, 
the body; secondly, the finer body, consisting of mind, intellect, and egoism. 
Behind them is the real Self of man. We have seen that all the qualities and 
powers of the gross body are borrowed from the mind, and the mind, the finer 
body, borrows its powers and luminosity from the soul, standing behind. 

A great many questions now arise about the nature of this soul. If the existence 
of the soul is drawn from the argument that it is self-luminous, that knowledge. 


existence, blessedness are its essence, it naturally follows that this soul cannot 
have been created. A self-luminous existence, independent of any other 
existence, could never have been the outcome of anything. It always existed; 
there was never a time when it did not exist, because if the soul did not exist, 
where was time? Time is in the soul; it is when the soul reflects its powers on 
the mind and the mind thinks, that time comes. When there was no soul, 
certainly there was no thought, and without thought, there was no time. How 
can the soul, therefore, be said to be existing in time, when time itself exists in 
the soul? It has neither birth nor death, but it is passing through all these 
various stages. It is manifesting slowly and gradually from lower to higher, and 
so on. It is expressing its own grandeur, working through the mind on the body; 
and through the body it is grasping the external world and understanding it. It 
takes up a body and uses it; and when that body has failed and is used up, it 
takes another body; and so on it goes. 

Here comes a very interesting question, that question which is generally known 
as the reincarnation of the soul. Sometimes people get frightened at the idea, 
and superstition is so strong that thinking men even believe that they are the 
outcome of nothing, and then, with the grandest logic, try to deduce the theory 
that although they have come out of zero, they will be eternal ever afterwards. 
Those that come out of zero will certainly have to go back to zero. Neither you, 
nor I nor anyone present, has come out of zero, nor will go back to zero. We 
have been existing eternally, and will exist, and there is no power under the sun 
or above the sun which can undo your or my existence or send us back to zero. 
Now this idea of reincarnation is not only not a frightening idea, but is most 
essential for the moral well-being of the human race. It is the only logical 
conclusion that thoughtful men can arrive at. If you are going to exist in 
eternity hereafter, it must be that you have existed through eternity in the past: 
it cannot be otherwise. I will try to answer a few objections that are generally 
brought against the theory. Although many of you will think they are very silly 
objections, still we have to answer them, for sometimes we find that the most 
thoughtful men are ready to advance the silliest ideas. Well has it been said that 
there never was an idea so absurd that it did not find philosophers to defend it. 
The first objection is, why do we not remember our past? Do we remember all 
our past in this life? How many of you remember what you did when you were 
babies? None of you remember your early childhood, and if upon memory 


depends your existence, then this argument proves that you did not exist as 
babies, because you do not remember your babyhood. It is simply unmitigated 
nonsense to say that our existence depends on our remembering it. Why should 
we remember the past? That brain is gone, broken into pieces, and a new brain 
has been manufactured. What has come to this brain is the resultant, the sum 
total of the impressions acquired in our past, with which the mind has come to 
inhabit the new body. 

I, as I stand here, am the effect, the result, of all the infinite past which is 
tacked on to me. And why is it necessary for me to remember all the past? 
When a great ancient sage, a seer, or a prophet of old, who came face to face 
with the truth, says something, these modern men stand up and say, "Oh, he 
was a fool!" But just use another name, "Huxley says it, or Tyndall"; then it 
must be true, and they take it for granted. In place of ancient superstitions they 
have erected modern superstitions, in place of the old Popes of religion they 
have installed modern Popes of science. So we see that this objection as to 
memory is not valid, and that is about the only serious objection that is raised 
against this theory. Although we have seen that it is not necessary for the 
theory that there shall be the memory of past lives, yet at the same time, we are 
in a position to assert that there are instances which show that this memory 
does come, and that each one of us will get back this memory in that life in 
which he will become free. Then alone you will find that this world is but a 
dream; then alone you will realise in the soul of your soul that you are but 
actors and the world is a stage; then alone will the idea of non-attachment come 
to you with the power of thunder; then all this thirst for enjoyment, this 
clinging on to life and this world will vanish for ever; then the mind will see 
dearly as daylight how many times all these existed for you, how many 
millions of times you had fathers and mothers, sons and daughters, husbands 
and wives, relatives and friends, wealth and power. They came and went. How 
many times you were on the topmost crest of the wave, and how many times 
you were down at the bottom of despair! When memory will bring all these to 
you, then alone will you stand as a hero and smile when the world frowns upon 
you. Then alone will you stand up and say. "I care not for thee even, O Death, 
what terrors hast thou for me?" This will come to all. 


Are there any arguments, any rational proofs for this reincarnation of the soul? 


So far we have been giving the negative side, showing that the opposite 
arguments to disprove it are not valid. Are there any positive proofs? There are; 
and most valid ones, too. No other theory except that of reincarnation accounts 
for the wide divergence that we find between man and man in their powers to 
acquire knowledge. First, let us consider the process by means of which 
knowledge is acquired. Suppose I go into the street and see a dog. How do I 
know it is a dog? I refer it to my mind, and in my mind are groups of all my 
past experiences, arranged and pigeon-holed, as it were. As soon as a new 
impression comes, I take it up and refer it to some of the old pigeon-holes, and 
as soon as I find a group of the same impressions already existing, I place it in 
that group, and I am satisfied. I know it is a dog, because it coincides with the 
impressions already there. When I do not find the cognates of this new 
experience inside, I become dissatisfied. When, not finding the cognates of an 
impression, we become dissatisfied, this state of the mind is called "ignorance"; 
but, when, finding the cognates of an impression already existing, we become 
satisfied, this is called "knowledge". When one apple fell, men became 
dissatisfied. Then gradually they found out the group. What was the group they 
found? That all apples fell, so they called it "gravitation". Now we see that 
without a fund of already existing experience, any new experience would be 
impossible, for there would be nothing to which to refer the new impression. 

So, if, as some of the European philosophers think, a child came into the world 
with what they call tabula rasa, such a child would never attain to any degree 
of intellectual power, because he would have nothing to which to refer his new 
experiences. We see that the power of acquiring knowledge varies in each 
individual, and this shows that each one of us has come with his own fund of 
knowledge. Knowledge can only be got in one way, the way of experience; 
there is no other way to know. If we have not experienced it in this life, we 
must have experienced it in other lives. How is it that the fear of death is 
everywhere? A little chicken is just out of an egg and an eagle comes, and the 
chicken flies in fear to its mother. There is an old explanation (I should hardly 
dignify it by such a name). It is called instinct. What makes that little chicken 
just out of the egg afraid to die? How is it that as soon as a duckling hatched by 
a hen comes near water, it jumps into it and swims? It never swam before, nor 
saw anything swim. People call it instinct. It is a big word, but it leaves us 
where we were before. Let us study this phenomenon of instinct. A child 
begins to play on the piano. At first she must pay attention to every key she is 


fingering, and as she goes on and on for months and years, the playing becomes 
almost involuntary, instinctive. What was first done with conscious will does 
not require later on an effort of the will. This is not yet a complete proof. One 
half remains, and that is that almost all the actions which are now instinctive 
can be brought under the control of the will. Each muscle of the body can be 
brought under control. This is perfectly well known. So the proof is complete 
by this double method, that what we now call instinct is degeneration of 
voluntary actions; therefore, if the analogy applies to the whole of creation, if 
all nature is uniform, then what is instinct in lower animals, as well as in men, 
must be the degeneration of will. 

Applying the law we dwelt upon under macrocosm that each involution 
presupposes an evolution, and each evolution an involution, we see that instinct 
is involved reason. What we call instinct in men or animals must therefore be 
involved, degenerated, voluntary actions, and voluntary actions are impossible 
without experience. Experience started that knowledge, and that knowledge is 
there. The fear of death, the duckling taking to the water and all involuntary 
actions in the human being which have become instinctive, are the results of 
past experiences. So far we have proceeded very clearly, and so far the latest 
science is with us. But here comes one more difficulty. The latest scientific 
men are coming back to the ancient sages, and as far as they have done so, 
there is perfect agreement. They admit that each man and each animal is born 
with a fund of experience, and that all these actions in the mind are the result of 
past experience. "But what," they ask, "is the use of saying that that experience 
belongs to the soul? Why not say it belongs to the body, and the body alone? 
Why not say it is hereditary transmission?" This is the last question. Why not 
say that all the experience with which I am born is the resultant effect of all the 
past experience of my ancestors? The sum total of the experience from the little 
protoplasm up to the highest human being is in me, but it has come from body 
to body in the course of hereditary transmission. Where will the difficulty be? 
This question is very nice, and we admit some part of this hereditary 
transmission. How far? As far as furnishing the material. We, by our past 
actions, conform ourselves to a certain birth in a certain body, and the only 
suitable material for that body comes from the parents who have made 
themselves fit to have that soul as their offspring. 


The simple hereditary theory takes for granted the most astonishing proposition 
without any proof, that mental experience can be recorded in matters, that 
mental experience can be involved in matter. When I look at you in the lake of 
my mind there is a wave. That wave subsides, but it remains in fine form, as an 
impression. We understand a physical impression remaining in the body. But 
what proof is there for assuming that the mental impression can remain in the 
body, since the body goes to pieces? What carries it? Even granting it were 
possible for each mental impression to remain in the body, that every 
impression, beginning from the first man down to my father, was in my father's 
body, how could it be transmitted to me? Through the bioplasmic cell? How 
could that be? Because the father's body does not come to the child in toto. The 
same parents may have a number of children; then, from this theory of 
hereditary transmission, where the impression and the impressed (that is to say, 
material) are one, it rigorously follows that by the birth of every child the 
parents must lose a part of their own impressions, or, if the parents should 
transmit the whole of their impressions, then, after the birth of the first child, 
their minds would be a vacuum. 

Again, if in the bioplasmic cell the infinite amount of impressions from all time 
has entered, where and how is it? This is a most impossible position, and until 
these physiologists can prove how and where those impressions live in that 
cell, and what they mean by a mental impression sleeping in the physical cell, 
their position cannot be taken for granted. So far it is clear then, that this 
impression is in the mind, that the mind comes to take its birth and rebirth, and 
uses the material which is most proper for it, and that the mind which has made 
itself fit for only a particular kind of body will have to wait until it gets that 
material. This we understand. The theory then comes to this, that there is 
hereditary transmission so far as furnishing the material to the soul is 
concerned. But the soul migrates and manufactures body after body, and each 
thought we think, and each deed we do, is stored in it in fine forms, ready to 
spring up again and take a new shape. When I look at you a wave rises in my 
mind. It dives down, as it were, and becomes finer and finer, but it does not die. 
It is ready to start up again as a wave in the shape of memory. So all these 
impressions are in my mind, and when I die the resultant force of them will be 
upon me. A ball is here, and each one of us takes a mallet in his hands and 
strikes the ball from all sides; the ball goes from point to point in the room, and 


when it reaches the door it flies out. What does it carry out with it? The 
resultant of all these blows. That will give it its direction. So, what directs the 
soul when the body dies? The resultant, the sum total of all the works it has 
done, of the thoughts it has thought. If the resultant is such that it has to 
manufacture a new body for further experience, it will go to those parents who 
are ready to supply it with suitable material for that body. Thus, from body to 
body it will go, sometimes to a heaven, and back again to earth, becoming man, 
or some lower animal. This way it will go on until it has finished its 
experience, and completed the circle. It then knows its own nature, knows what 
it is, and ignorance vanishes, its powers become manifest, it becomes perfect; 
no more is there any necessity for the soul to work through physical bodies, nor 
is there any necessity for it to work through finer, or mental bodies. It shines in 
its own light, and is free, no more to be born, no more to die. 

We will not go now into the particulars of this. But I will bring before you one 
more point with regard to this theory of reincarnation. It is the theory that 
advances the freedom of the human soul. It is the one theory that does not lay 
the blame of all our weakness upon somebody else, which is a common human 
fallacy. We do not look at our own faults; the eyes do not see themselves, they 
see the eyes of everybody else. We human beings are very slow to recognise 
our own weakness, our own faults, so long as we can lay the blame upon 
somebody else. Men in general lay all the blame of life on their fellow-men, or, 
failing that, on God, or they conjure up a ghost, and say it is fate. Where is fate, 
and who is fate? We reap what we sow. We are the makers of our own fate. 
None else has the blame, none has the praise. The wind is blowing; those 
vessels whose sails are unfurled catch it, and go forward on their way, but those 
which have their sails furled do not catch the wind. Is that the fault of the 
wind? Is it the fault of the merciful Father, whose wind of mercy is blowing 
without ceasing, day and night, whose mercy knows no decay, is it His fault 
that some of us are happy and some unhappy? We make our own destiny. His 
sun shines for the weak as well as for the strong. His wind blows for saint and 
sinner alike. He is the Lord of all, the Father of all, merciful, and impartial. Do 
you mean to say that He, the Lord of creation, looks upon the petty things of 
our life in the same light as we do? What a degenerate idea of God that would 
be! We are like little puppies, making life-and-death struggles here, and 
foolishly thinking that even God Himself will take it as seriously as we do. He 


knows what the puppies' play means. Our attempts to lay the blame on Him, 
making Him the punisher, and the rewarder, are only foolish. He neither 
punishes, nor rewards any. His infinite mercy is open to every one, at all times, 
in all places, under all conditions, unfailing, unswerving. Upon us depends how 
we use it. Upon us depends how we utilise it. Blame neither man, nor God, nor 
anyone in the world. When you find yourselves suffering, blame yourselves, 
and try to do better. 

This is the only solution of the problem. Those that blame others — and, alas! 
the number of them is increasing every day — are generally miserable with 
helpless brains; they have brought themselves to that pass through their own 
mistakes and blame others, but this does not alter their position. It does not 
serve them in any way. This attempt to throw the blame upon others only 
weakens them the more. Therefore, blame none for your own faults, stand upon 
your own feet, and take the whole responsibility upon yourselves. Say, "This 
misery that I am suffering is of my own doing, and that very thing proves that it 
will have to be undone by me alone." That which I created, I can demolish; that 
which is created by some one else I shall never be able to destroy. Therefore, 
stand up, be bold, be strong. Take the whole responsibility on your own 
shoulders, and know that you are the creator of your own destiny. All the 
strength and succour you want is within yourselves. Therefore, make your own 
future. "Let the dead past bury its dead." The infinite future is before you, and 
you must always remember that each word, thought, and deed, lays up a store 
for you and that as the bad thoughts and bad works are ready to spring upon 
you like tigers, so also there is the inspiring hope that the good thoughts and 
good deeds are ready with the power of a hundred thousand angels to defend 
you always and for ever. 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XII 
IMMORTALITY 

{Delivered in America) 

What question has been asked a greater number of times, what idea has led 
men more to search the universe for an answer, what question is nearer and 
dearer to the human heart, what question is more inseparably connected with 
our existence, than this one, the immortality of the human soul? It has been the 
theme of poets and sages, of priests and prophets; kings on the throne have 
discussed it, beggars in the street have dreamt of it. The best of humanity have 
approached it, and the worst of men have hoped for it. The interest in the theme 
has not died yet, nor will it die so long as human nature exists. Various answers 
have been presented to the world by various minds. Thousands, again, in every 
period of history have given up the discussion, and yet the question remains 
fresh as ever. Often in the turmoil and struggle of our lives we seem to forget it, 
but suddenly some one dies — one, perhaps, whom we loved, one near and 
dear to our hearts is snatched away from us — and the struggle, the din and 
turmoil of the world around us, cease for a moment, and the soul asks the old 
questions "What after this?" "What becomes of the soul?" 

All human knowledge proceeds out of experience; we cannot know anything 
except by experience. All our reasoning is based upon generalised experience, 
all our knowledge is but harmonised experience. Looking around us, what do 
we find? A continuous change. The plant comes out of the seed, grows into the 
tree, completes the circle, and comes back to the seed. The animal comes, lives 
a certain time, dies, and completes the circle. So does man. The mountains 
slowly but surely crumble away, the rivers slowly but surely dry up, rains come 
out of the sea, and go back to the sea. Everywhere circles are being completed, 
birth, growth, development, and decay following each other with mathematical 
precision. This is our everyday experience. Inside of it all, behind all this vast 
mass of what we call life, of millions of forms and shapes, millions upon 
millions of varieties, beginning from the lowest atom to the highest 
spiritualised man, we find existing a certain unity. Every day we find that the 






wall that was thought to be dividing one thing and another is being broken 
down, and all matter is coming to be recognised by modern science as one 
substance, manifesting in different ways and in various forms; the one life that 
runs through all like a continuous chain, of which all these various forms 
represent the links, link after link, extending almost infinitely, but of the same 
one chain. This is what is called evolution. It is an old, old idea, as old as 
human society, only it is getting fresher and fresher as human knowledge is 
progressing. There is one thing more, which the ancients perceived, but which 
in modern times is not yet so clearly perceived, and that is involution. The seed 
is becoming the plant; a grain of sand never becomes a plant. It is the father 
that becomes a child; a lump of clay never becomes the child. From what does 
this evolution come, is the question. What was the seed? It was the same as the 
tree. All the possibilities of a future tree are in that seed; all the possibilities of 
a future man are in the little baby; all the possibilities of any future life are in 
the germ. What is this? The ancient philosophers of India called it involution. 
We find then, that every evolution presupposes an involution. Nothing can be 
evolved which is not already there. Here, again, modem science comes to our 
help. You know by mathematical reasoning that the sum total of the energy that 
is displayed in the universe is the same throughout. You cannot take away one 
atom of matter or one foot-pound of force. You cannot add to the universe one 
atom of matter or one foot-pound of force. As such, evolution does not come 
out of zero; then, where does it come from? From previous involution. The 
child is the man involved, and the man is the child evolved. The seed is the tree 
involved, and the tree is the seed evolved. All the possibilities of life are in the 
germ. The problem becomes a little clearer. Add to it the first idea of 
continuation of life. From the lowest protoplasm to the most perfect human 
being there is really but one life. Just as in one life we have so many various 
phases of expression, the protoplasm developing into the baby, the child, the 
young man, the old man, so, from that protoplasm up to the most perfect man 
we get one continuous life, one chain. This is evolution, but we have seen that 
each evolution presupposes an involution. The whole of this life which slowly 
manifests itself evolves itself from the protoplasm to the perfected human 
being — the Incarnation of God on earth — the whole of this series is but one 
life, and the whole of this manifestation must have been involved in that very 
protoplasm. This whole life, this very God on earth, was involved in it and 
slowly came out, manifesting itself slowly, slowly, slowly. The highest 



expression must have been there in the germ state in minute form; therefore 
this one force, this whole chain, is the involution of that cosmic life which is 
everywhere. It is this one mass of intelligence which, from the protoplasm up 
to the most perfected man, is slowly and slowly uncoiling itself. Not that it 
grows. Take off all ideas of growth from your mind. With the idea of growth is 
associated something coming from outside, something extraneous, which 
would give the lie to the truth that the Infinite which lies latent in every life is 
independent of all external conditions. It can never grow; It was always there, 
and only manifests Itself. 

The effect is the cause manifested. There is no essential difference between the 
effect and the cause. Take this glass, for instance. There was the material, and 
the material plus the will of the manufacturer made the glass and these two 
were its causes and are present in it. In what form is the will present? As 
adhesion. If the force were not here, each particle would fall away. What is the 
effect then? It is the same as the cause, only taking; different form, a different 
composition. When the cause is changed and limited for a time, it becomes the 
effect We must remember this. Applying it to our idea of life the whole of the 
manifestation of this one series, from the protoplasm up to the most perfect 
man, must be the very same thing as cosmic life. First it got involved and 
became finer; and out of that fine something, which wet the cause, it has gone 
on evolving, manifesting itself, and becoming grosser. 

But the question of immortality is not yet settled. We have seen that everything 
in this universe is indestructible. There is nothing new; there will be nothing 
new. The same series of manifestations are presenting themselves alternately 
like a wheel, coming up and going down. All motion in this universe is in the 
form of waves, successively rising and falling. Systems after systems are 
coming out of fine forms, evolving themselves, and taking grosser forms, again 
melting down, as it were, and going back to the fine forms. Again they rise out 
of that, evolving for a certain period and slowly going back to the cause. So 
with all life. Each manifestation of life is coming up and then going back again. 
What goes down? The form. The form breaks to pieces, but it comes up again. 
In one sense bodies and forms even are eternal. How? Suppose we take a 
number of dice and throw them, and they fall in this ratio — 6 — 5 — 3 — 4. 
We take the dice up and throw them again and again; there must be a time 


when the same numbers will come again; the same combination must come. 
Now each particle, each atom, that is in this universe, I take for such a die, and 
these are being thrown out and combined again and again. All these forms 
before you are one combination. Here are the forms of a glass, a table, a pitcher 
of water, and so forth. This is one combination; in time, it will all break. But 
there must come a time when exactly the same combination comes again, when 
you will be here, and this form will be here, this subject will be talked, and this 
pitcher will be here. An infinite number of times this has been, and an infinite 
number of times this will be repeated. Thus far with the physical forms. What 
do we find? That even the combination of physical forms is eternally repeated. 

A most interesting conclusion that follows from this theory is the explanation 
of facts such as these: Some of you, perhaps, have seen a man who can read the 
past life of others and foretell the future. How is it possible for any one to see 
what the future will be, unless there is a regulated future? Effects of the past 
will recur in the future, and we see that it is so. You have seen the big Ferris 
Wheel* in Chicago. The wheel revolves, and the little rooms in the wheel are 
regularly coming one after another; one set of persons gets into these, and after 
they have gone round the circle, they get out, and a fresh batch of people gets 
in. Each one of these batches is like one of these manifestations, from the 
lowest animals to the highest man. Nature is like the chain of the Ferris Wheel, 
endless and infinite, and these little carriages are the bodies or forms in which 
fresh batches of souls are riding, going up higher and higher until they become 
perfect and come out of the wheel. But the wheel goes on. And so long as the 
bodies are in the wheel, it can be absolutely and mathematically foretold where 
they will go, but not so of the souls. Thus it is possible to read the past and the 
future of nature with precision. We see, then, that there is recurrence of the 
same material phenomena at certain periods, and that the same combinations 
have been taking place through eternity. But that is not the immortality of the 
soul. No force can die, no matter can be annihilated. What becomes of it? It 
goes on changing, backwards and forwards, until it returns to the source from 
which it came. There is no motion in a straight line. Everything moves in a 
circle; a straight line, infinitely produced, becomes a circle. If that is the case, 
there cannot be eternal degeneration for any soul. It cannot be. Everything must 
complete the circle, and come back to its source. What are you and I and all 
these souls? In our discussion of evolution and involution, we have seen that 


you and I must be part of the cosmic consciousness, cosmic life, cosmic mind, 
which got involved and we must complete the circle and go back to this cosmic 
intelligence which is God. This cosmic intelligence is what people call Lord, or 
God, or Christ, or Buddha, or Brahman, what the materialists perceive as force, 
and the agnostics as that infinite, inexpressible beyond; and we are all parts of 
that. 

This is the second idea, yet this is not sufficient; there will be still more doubts. 
It is very good to say that there is no destruction for any force. But all the 
forces and forms that we see are combinations. This form before us is a 
composition of several component parts, and so every force that we see is 
similarly composite. If you take the scientific idea of force, and call it the sum 
total, the resultant of several forces, what becomes of your individuality? 
Everything that is a compound must sooner or later go back to its component 
parts. Whatever in this universe is the result of the combination of matter or 
force must sooner or later go back to its components. Whatever is the result of 
certain causes must die, must be destroyed. It gets broken up, dispersed, and 
resolved back into its components. Soul is not a force; neither is it thought. It is 
the manufacturer of thought, but not thought itself; it is the manufacturer of the 
body, but not the body. Why so? We see that the body cannot be the soul. Why 
not? Because it is not intelligent. A corpse is not intelligent, nor a piece of meat 
in a butcher's shop. What do we mean by intelligence? Reactive power. We 
want to go a little more deeply into this. Here is a pitcher; I see it. How? Rays 
of light from the pitcher enter my eyes, and make a picture in my retina, which 
is carried to the brain. Yet there is no vision. What the physiologists call the 
sensory nerves carry this impression inwards. But up to this there is no 
reaction. The nerve centre in the brain carries the impression to the mind, and 
the mind reacts, and as soon as this reaction comes, the pitcher flashes before 
it. Take a more commonplace example. Suppose you are listening to me 
intently and a mosquito is sitting on the tip of your nose and giving you that 
pleasant sensation which mosquitoes can give; but you are so intent on hearing 
me that you do not feel the mosquito at all. What has happened? The mosquito 
has bitten a certain part of your skin, and certain nerves are there. They have 
carried a certain sensation to the brain, and the impression is there, but the 
mind, being otherwise occupied, does not react, so you are not aware of the 
presence of the mosquito. When a new impression comes, if the mind does not 


react, we shall not be conscious of it, but when the reaction comes we feel, we 
see, we hear, and so forth. With this reaction comes illumination, as the 
Samkhya philosophers call it. We see that the body cannot illuminate, because 
in the absence of attention no sensation is possible. Cases have been known 
where, under peculiar conditions, a man who had never learnt a particular 
language was found able to speak it. Subsequent inquiries proved that the man 
had, when a child, lived among people who spoke that language and the 
impressions were left in his brain. These impressions remained stored up there, 
until through some cause the mind reacted, and illumination came, and then the 
man was able to speak the language. This shows that the mind alone is not 
sufficient, that the mind itself is an instrument in the hands of someone. In the 
case of that boy the mind contained that language, yet he did not know it, but 
later there came a time when he did. It shows that there is someone besides the 
mind; and when the boy was a baby, that someone did not use the power; but 
when the boy grew up, he took advantage of it, and used it. First, here is the 
body, second the mind, or instrument of thought, and third behind this mind is 
the Self of man. The Sanskrit word is Atman. As modern philosophers have 
identified thought with molecular changes in the brain, they do not know how 
to explain such a case, and they generally deny it. The mind is intimately 
connected with the brain which dies every time the body changes. The Self is 
the illuminator, and the mind is the instrument in Its hands, and through that 
instrument It gets hold of the external instrument, and thus comes perception. 
The external instruments get hold of the impressions and carry them to the 
organs, for you must remember always, that the eyes and ears are only 
receivers — it is the internal organs, the brain centres, which act. In Sanskrit 
these centres are called Indriyas, and they carry sensations to the mind, and the 
mind presents them further back to another state of the mind, which in Sanskrit 
is called Chitta, and there they are organised into will, and all these present 
them to the King of kings inside, the Ruler on His throne, the Self of man. He 
then sees and gives His orders. Then the mind immediately acts on the organs, 
and the organs on the external body. The real Perceiver, the real Ruler, the 
Governor, the Creator, the Manipulator of all this, is the Self of man. 

We see, then, that the Self of man is not the body, neither is It thought. It 
cannot be a compound. Why not? Because everything that is a compound can 
be seen or imagined. That which we cannot imagine or perceive, which we 



cannot bind together, is not force or matter, cause or effect, and cannot be a 
compound. The domain of compounds is only so far as our mental universe, 
our thought universe extends. Beyond this it does not hold good; it is as far as 
law reigns, and if there is anything beyond law, it cannot be a compound at all. 
The Self of man being beyond the law of causation, is not a compound. It is 
ever free and is the Ruler of everything that is within law. It will never die, 
because death means going back to the component parts, and that which was 
never a compound can never die. It is sheer nonsense to say It dies. 

We are now treading on finer and finer ground, and some of you, perhaps, will 
be frightened. We have seen that this Self, being beyond the little universe of 
matter and force and thought, is a simple; and as a simple It cannot die. That 
which does not die cannot live. For life and death are the obverse and reverse 
of the same coin. Life is another name for death, and death for life. One 
particular mode of manifestation is what we call life; another particular mode 
of manifestation of the same thing is what we call death. When the wave rises 
on the top it is life; and when it falls into the hollow it is death. If anything is 
beyond death, we naturally see it must also be beyond life. I must remind you 
of the first conclusion that the soul of man is part of the cosmic energy that 
exists, which is God. We now find that it is beyond life and death. You were 
never born, and you will never die. What is this birth and death that we see 
around us? This belongs to the body only, because the soul is omnipresent. 
"How can that be?" you may ask. "So many people are sitting here, and you say 
the soul is omnipresent?" What is there, I ask, to limit anything that is beyond 
law, beyond causation? This glass is limited; it is not omnipresent, because the 
surrounding matter forces it to take that form, does not allow it to expand. It is 
conditioned be everything around it, and is, therefore, limited. But that which is 
beyond law, where there is nothing to act upon it, how can that be limited? It 
must be omnipresent. You are everywhere in the universe. How is it then that I 
am born and I am going to die, and all that? That is the talk of ignorance, 
hallucination of the brain. You were neither born, nor will you die. You have 
had neither birth, nor will have rebirth, nor life, nor incarnation, nor anything. 
What do you mean by coming and going? All shallow nonsense. You are 
everywhere. Then what is this coming and going? It is the hallucination 
produced by the change of this fine body which you call the mind. That is 
going on. Just a little speck of cloud passing before the sky. As it moves on and 


on, it may create the delusion that the sky moves. Sometimes you see a cloud 
moving before the moon, and you think that the moon is moving. When you are 
in a train you think the land is flying, or when you are in a boat, you think the 
water moves. In reality you are neither going nor coming, you are not being 
born, nor going to be reborn; you are infinite, ever-present, beyond all 
causation, and ever-free. Such a question is out of place, it is arrant nonsense. 
How could there be mortality when there was no birth? 

One step more we will have to take to come to a logical conclusion. There is no 
half-way house. You are metaphysicians, and there is no crying quarter. If then 
we are beyond all law, we must be omniscient, ever-blessed; all knowledge 
must be in us and all power and blessedness. Certainly. You are the omniscient, 
omnipresent being of the universe. But of such beings can there be many? Can 
there be a hundred thousand millions of omnipresent beings? Certainly not. 
Then, what becomes of us all? You are only one; there is only one such Self, 
and that One Self is you. Standing behind this little nature is what we call the 
Soul. There is only One Being, One Existence, the ever-blessed, the 
omnipresent, the omniscient, the birthless, deathless. "Through His control the 
sky expands, through His control the air breathes, through His control the sun 
shines, and through His control all live. He is the Reality in nature. He is the 
Soul of your soul, nay, more, you are He, you are one with Him." Wherever 
there are two, there is fear, there is danger, there is conflict, there is strife. 

When it is all One, who is there to hate, who is there to struggle with? When it 
is all He, with whom can you fight? This explains the true nature of life; this 
explains the true nature of being, this is perfection, and this is God. As long as 
you see the many, you are under delusion. "In this world of many he who sees 
the One, in this everchanging world he who sees Him who never changes, as 
the Soul of his own soul, as his own Self, he is free, he is blessed, he has 
reached the goal." Therefore know that thou art He; thou art the God of this 
universe, "Tat Tvam Asi" (That thou art). All these various ideas that I am a 
man or a woman, or sick or healthy, or strong or weak, or that I hate or I love, 
or have a little power, are but hallucinations. Away with them I What makes 
you weak? What makes you fear? You are the One Being in the universe. What 
frightens you? Stand up then and be free. Know that every thought and word 
that weakens you in this world is the only evil that exists. Whatever makes men 
weak and fear is the only evil that should be shunned. What can frighten you? 


If the suns come down, and the moons crumble into dust, and systems after 
systems are hurled into annihilation, what is that to you? Stand as a rock; you 
are indestructible. You are the Self, the God of the universe. Say — "I am 
Existence Absolute, Bliss Absolute, Knowledge Absolute, I am He," and like a 
lion breaking its cage, break your chain and be free for ever. What frightens 
you, what holds you down? Only ignorance and delusion; nothing else can bind 
you. You are the Pure One, the Ever-blessed. 

Silly fools tell you that you are sinners, and you sit down in a corner and weep. 
It is foolishness, wickedness, downright rascality to say that you are sinners! 
You are all God. See you not God and call Him man? Therefore, if you dare, 
stand on that — mould your whole life on that. If a man cuts your throat, do not 
say no, for you are cutting your own throat. When you help a poor man, do not 
feel the least pride. That is worship for you, and not the cause of pride. Is not 
the whole universe you? Where is there any one that is not you? You are the 
Soul of this universe. You are the sun, moon, and stars, it is you that are 
shining everywhere. The whole universe is you. Whom are you going to hate or 
to fight? Know, then, that thou art He, and model your whole life accordingly; 
and he who knows this and models his life accordingly will no more grovel in 
darkness. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XIII 
THE ATMAN 

{Delivered in America) 

Many of you have read Max Muller's celebrated book, Three Lectures on the 
Vedanta Philosophy, and some of you may, perhaps, have read, in German, 
Professor Deussen's book on the same philosophy. In what is being written and 
taught in the West about the religious thought of India, one school of Indian 
thought is principally represented, that which is called Advaitism, the monistic 
side of Indian religion; and sometimes it is thought that all the teachings of the 
Vedas are comprised in that one system of philosophy. There are, however, 
various phases of Indian thought; and, perhaps, this non-dualistic form is in the 
minority as compared with the other phases. From the most ancient times there 
have been various sects of thought in India, and as there never was a 
formulated or recognised church or any body of men to designate the doctrines 
which should be believed by each school, people were very free to choose their 
own form, make their own philosophy and establish their own sects. We, 
therefore, find that from the most ancient times India was full of religious sects. 
At the present time, I do not know how many hundreds of sects we have in 
India, and several fresh ones are coming into existence every year. It seems that 
the religious activity of that nation is simply inexhaustible. 

Of these various sects, in the first place, there can be made two main divisions, 
the orthodox and the unorthodox. Those that believe in the Hindu scriptures, 
the Vedas, as eternal revelations of truth, are called orthodox, and those that 
stand on other authorities, rejecting the Vedas, are the heterodox in India. The 
chief modern unorthodox Hindu sects are the Jains and the Buddhists. Among 
the orthodox some declare that the scriptures are of much higher authority than 
reason; others again say that only that portion of the scriptures which is rational 
should be taken and the rest rejected. 

Of the three orthodox divisions, the Sankhyas, the Naiyayikas, and the 
Mimamsakas, the former two, although they existed as philosophical schools. 






failed to form any sect. The one sect that now really covers India is that of the 
later Mimamsakas or the Vedantists. Their philosophy is called Vedantism. All 
the schools of Hindu philosophy start from the Vedanta or Upanishads, but the 
monists took the name to themselves as a speciality, because they wanted to 
base the whole of their theology and philosophy upon the Vedanta and nothing 
else. In the course of time the Vedanta prevailed, and all the various sects of 
India that now exist can be referred to one or other of its schools. Yet these 
schools are not unanimous in their opinions. 

We find that there are three principal variations among the Vedantists. On one 
point they all agree, and that is that they all believe in God. All these 
Vedantists also believe the Vedas to be the revealed word of God, not exactly 
in the same sense, perhaps, as the Christians or the Mohammedans believe, but 
in a very peculiar sense. Their idea is that the Vedas are an expression of the 
knowledge of God, and as God is eternal. His knowledge is eternally with Him, 
and so are the Vedas eternal. There is another common ground of belief: that of 
creation in cycles, that the whole of creation appears and disappears; that it is 
projected and becomes grosser and grosser, and at the end of an incalculable 
period of time it becomes finer and finer, when it dissolves and subsides, and 
then comes a period of rest. Again it: begins to appear and goes through the 
same process. They postulate the existence of a material which they call 
Akasha, which is something like the ether of the scientists, and a power which 
they call Prana. About; this Prana they declare that by its vibration the universe 
is produced. When a cycle ends, all this manifestation of nature becomes finer 
and finer and dissolves into that Akasha which cannot be seen or felt, yet out of 
which everything is manufactured. All the forces that we see in nature, such as 
gravitation, attraction, and repulsion, or as thought, feeling, and nervous 
motion — all these various forces resolve into that Prana, and the vibration of 
the Prana ceases. In that state it remains until the beginning of the next cycle. 
Prana then begins to vibrate, and that vibration acts upon the Akasha, and all 
these forms are thrown out in regular succession. 

The first school I will tell you about is styled the dualistic school. The dualists 
believe that God, who is the creator of the universe and its ruler, is eternally 
separate from nature, eternally separate from the human soul. God is eternal; 
nature is eternal; so are all souls. Nature and the souls become manifested and 



change, but God remains the same. According to the dualists, again, this God is 
personal in that He has qualities, not that He has a body. He has human 
attributes; He is merciful. He is just. He is powerful. He is almighty. He can be 
approached. He can be prayed to. He can be loved. He loves in return, and so 
forth. In one word. He is a human God, only infinitely greater than man; He has 
none of the evil qualities which men have. "He is the repository of an infinite 
number of blessed qualities" — that is their definition. He cannot create 
without materials, and nature is the material out of which He creates the whole 
universe. There are some non-Vedantic dualists, called "Atomists", who 
believe that nature is nothing but an infinite number of atoms, and God's will, 
acting upon these atoms, creates. The Vedantists deny the atomic theory; they 
say it is perfectly illogical. The indivisible atoms are like geometrical points 
without parts or magnitude; but something without parts or magnitude, if 
multiplied an infinite number of times, will remain the same. Anything that has 
no parts will never make something that has parts; any number of zeros added 
together will not make one single whole number. So, if these atoms are such 
that they have no parts or magnitude, the creation of the universe is simply 
impossible out of such atoms. Therefore, according to the Vedantic dualists, 
there is what they call indiscrete or undifferentiated nature, and out of that God 
creates the universe. The vast mass of Indian people are dualists. Human nature 
ordinarily cannot conceive of anything higher. We find that ninety per cent of 
the population of the earth who believe in any religion are dualists. All the 
religions of Europe and Western Asia are dualistic; they have to be. The 
ordinary man cannot think of anything which is not concrete. He naturally likes 
to cling to that which his intellect can grasp. That is to say, he can only 
conceive of higher spiritual ideas by bringing them down to his own level. He 
can only grasp abstract thoughts by making them concrete. This is the religion 
of the masses all over the world. They believe in a God who is entirely separate 
from them, a great king, a high, mighty monarch, as it were. At the same time 
they make Him purer than the monarchs of the earth; they give Him all good 
qualities and remove the evil qualities from Him. As if it were ever possible for 
good to exist without evil; as if there could be any conception of light without a 
conception of darkness! 

With all dualistic theories the first difficulty is, how is it possible that under the 
rule of a just and merciful God, the repository of an infinite number of good 


qualities, there can be so many evils in this world? This question arose in all 
dualistic religions, but the Hindus never invented a Satan as an answer to it. 

The Hindus with one accord laid the blame on man, and it was easy for them to 
do so. Why? Because, as I have just now told you, they did not believe that 
souls were created out of nothing We see in this life that we can shape and 
form our future every one of us, every day, is trying to shape the morrow; 
today we fix the fate of the morrow; tomorrow we shall fix the fate of the day 
after, and so on. It is quite logical that this reasoning can be pushed backward 
too. If by our own deeds we shape our destiny in the future why not apply the 
same rule to the past? If, in an infinite chain, a certain number of links are 
alternately repeated then, if one of these groups of links be explained, we can 
explain the whole chain. So, in this infinite length of time, if we can cut off one 
portion and explain that portion and understand it, then, if it be true that nature 
is uniform, the same explanation must apply to the whole chain of time. If it be 
true that we are working out our own destiny here within this short space of 
time if it be true that everything must have a cause as we see it now, it must 
also be true that that which we are now is the effect of the whole of our past; 
therefore, no other person is necessary to shape the destiny of mankind but man 
himself. The evils that are in the world are caused by none else but ourselves. 
We have caused all this evil; and just as we constantly see misery resulting 
from evil actions, so can we also see that much of the existing misery in the 
world is the effect of the past wickedness of man. Man alone, therefore, 
according to this theory, is responsible. God is not to blame. He, the eternally 
merciful Father, is not to blame at all. "We reap what we sow." 

Another peculiar doctrine of the dualists is, that every soul must eventually 
come to salvation. No one will be left out. Through various vicissitudes, 
through various sufferings and enjoyments, each one of them will come out in 
the end. Come out of what? The one common idea of all Hindu sects is that all 
souls have to get out of this universe. Neither the universe which we see and 
feel, nor even an imaginary one, can be right, the real one, because both are 
mixed up with good and evil. According to the dualists, there is beyond this 
universe a place full of happiness and good only; and when that place is 
reached, there will be no more necessity of being born and reborn, of living and 
dying; and this idea is very dear to them. No more disease there, and no more 
death. There will be eternal happiness, and they will be in the presence of God 


for all time and enjoy Him for ever. They believe that all beings, from the 
lowest worm up to the highest angels and gods, will all, sooner or later, attain 
to that world where there will be no more misery. But our world will never end; 
it goes on infinitely, although moving in waves. Although moving in cycles it 
never ends. The number of souls that are to be saved, that are to be perfected, is 
infinite. Some are in plants, some are in the lower animals, some are in men, 
some are in gods, but all of them, even the highest gods, are imperfect, are in 
bondage. What is the bondage? The necessity of being born and the necessity 
of dying. Even the highest gods die. What are these gods? They mean certain 
states, certain offices. For instance, Indra the king of gods, means a certain 
office; some soul which was very high has gone to fill that post in this cycle, 
and after this cycle he will be born again as man and come down to this earth, 
and the man who is very good in this cycle will go and fill that post in the next 
cycle. So with all these gods; they are certain offices which have been filled 
alternately by millions and millions of souls, who, after filling those offices, 
came down and became men. Those who do good works in this world and help 
others, but with an eye to reward, hoping to reach heaven or to get the praise of 
their fellow-men, must when they die, reap the benefit of those good works — 
they become these gods. But that is not salvation; salvation never will come 
through hope of reward. Whatever man desires the Lord gives him. Men desire 
power, they desire prestige, they desire enjoyments as gods, and they get these 
desires fulfilled, but no effect of work can be eternal. The effect will be 
exhausted after a certain length of time; it may be aeons, but after that it will be 
gone, and these gods must come down again and become men and get another 
chance for liberation. The lower animals will come up and become men, 
become gods, perhaps, then become men again, or go back to animals, until the 
time when they will get rid of all desire for enjoyment, the thirst for life, this 
clinging on to the "me and mine". This "me and mine" is the very root of all the 
evil in the world. If you ask a dualist, "Is your child yours?" he will say, "It is 
God's. My property is not mine, it is God's." Everything should be held as 
God's. 

Now, these dualistic sects in India are great vegetarians, great preachers of non¬ 
killing of animals. But their idea about it is quite different from that of the 
Buddhist. If you ask a Buddhist, "Why do you preach against killing any 
animal?" he will answer, "We have no right to take any life;" and if you ask a 


dualist, "Why do you not kill any animal?" he says, "Because it is the Lord's." 
So the dualist says that this "me and mine" is to be applied to God and God 
alone; He is the only "me" and everything is His. When a man has come to the 
state when he has no "me and mine," when everything is given up to the Lord, 
when he loves everybody and is ready even to give up his life for an animal, 
without any desire for reward, then his heart will be purified, and when the 
heart has been purified, into that heart will come the love of God. God is the 
centre of attraction for every soul, and the dualist says, "A needle covered up 
with clay will not be attracted by a magnet, but as soon as the clay is washed 
off, it will be attracted." God is the magnet and human soul is the needle, and 
its evil works, the dirt and dust that cover it. As soon as the soul is pure it will 
by natural attraction come to God and remain with Him for ever, but remain 
eternally separate. The perfected soul, if it wishes, can take any form; it is able 
to take a hundred bodies, if it wishes, or have none at all, if it so desires. It 
becomes almost almighty, except that it cannot create; that power belongs to 
God alone. None, however perfect, can manage the affairs of the universe; that 
function belongs to God. But all souls, when they become perfect, become 
happy for ever and live eternally with God. This is the dualistic statement. 

One other idea the dualists preach. They protest against the idea of praying to 
God, "Lord, give me this and give me that." They think that should not be 
done. If a man must ask some material gift, he should ask inferior beings for it; 
ask one of these gods, or angels or a perfected being for temporal things. God 
is only to be loved. It is almost a blasphemy to pray to God, "Lord, give me 
this, and give me that." According to the dualists, therefore, what a man wants, 
he will get sooner or later, by praying to one of the gods; but if he wants 
salvation, he must worship God. This is the religion of the masses of India. 

The real Vedanta philosophy begins with those known as the qualified non¬ 
dualists. They make the statement that the effect is never different from the 
cause; the effect is but the cause reproduced in another form. If the universe is 
the effect and God the cause, it must be God Himself — it cannot be anything 
but that. They start with the assertion that God is both the efficient and the 
material cause of the universe; that He Himself is the creator, and He Himself 
is the material out of which the whole of nature is projected. The word 
"creation" in your language has no equivalent in Sanskrit, because there is no 


sect in India which believes in creation, as it is regarded in the West, as 
something coming out of nothing. It seems that at one time there were a few 
that had some such idea, but they were very quickly silenced. At the present 
time I do not know of any sect that believes this. What we mean by creation is 
projection of that which already existed. Now, the whole universe, according to 
this sect, is God Himself. He is the material of the universe. We read in the 
Vedas, "As the Urnanabhi (spider) spins the thread out of its own body,.. . 
even so the whole universe has come out of the Being." 

If the effect is the cause reproduced, the question is: "How is it that we find this 
material, dull, unintelligent universe produced from a God, who is not material, 
but who is eternal intelligence? How, if the cause is pure and perfect, can the 
effect be quite different?" What do these qualified non-dualists say? Theirs is a 
very peculiar theory. They say that these three existences, God, nature, and the 
soul, are one. God is, as it were, the Soul, and nature and souls are the body of 
God. Just as I have a body and I have a soul, so the whole universe and all 
souls are the body of God, and God is the Soul of souls. Thus, God is the 
material cause of the universe. The body may be changed — may be young or 
old, strong or weak — but that does not affect the soul at all. It is the same 
eternal existence, manifesting through the body. Bodies come and go, but the 
soul does not change. Even so the whole universe is the body of God, and in 
that sense it is God. But the change in the universe does not affect God. Out of 
this material He creates the universe, and at the end of a cycle His body 
becomes finer, it contracts; at the beginning of another cycle it becomes 
expanded again, and out of it evolve all these different worlds. 

Now both the dualists and the qualified non-dualists admit that the soul is by its 
nature pure, but through its own deeds it becomes impure. The qualified non¬ 
dualists express it more beautifully than the dualists, by saving that the soul's 
purity and perfection become contracted and again become manifest, and what 
we are now trying to do is to remanifest the intelligence, the purity, the power 
which is natural to the soul. Souls have a multitude of qualities, but not that of 
almightiness or all-knowingness. Every wicked deed contracts the nature of the 
soul, and every good deed expands it, and these souls, are all parts of God. "As 
from a blazing fire fly millions of sparks of the same nature, even so from this 
Infinite Being, God, these souls have come." Each has the same goal. The God 


of the qualified non-dualists is also a Personal God, the repository of an infinite 
number of blessed qualities, only He is interpenetrating everything in the 
universe. He is immanent in everything and everywhere; and when the 
scriptures say that God is everything, it means that God is interpenetrating 
everything, not that God has become the wall, but that God is in the wall. There 
is not a particle, not an atom in the universe where He is not. Souls are all 
limited; they are not omnipresent. When they get expansion of their powers and 
become perfect, there is no more birth and death for them; they live with God 
for ever. 

Now we come to Advaitism, the last and, what we think, the fairest flower of 
philosophy and religion that any country in any age has produced, where 
human thought attains its highest expression and even goes beyond the mystery 
which seems to be impenetrable. This is the non-dualistic Vedantism. It is too 
abstruse, too elevated to be the religion of the masses. Even in India, its 
birthplace, where it has been ruling supreme for the last three thousand years, it 
has not been able to permeate the masses. As we go on we shall find that it is 
difficult for even the most thoughtful man and woman in any country to 
understand Advaitism. We have made ourselves so weak; we have made 
ourselves so low. We may make great claims, but naturally we want to lean on 
somebody else. We are like little, weak plants, always wanting a support. How 
many times I have been asked for a "comfortable religion!" Very few men ask 
for the truth, fewer still dare to learn the truth, and fewest of all dare to follow 
it in all its practical bearings. It is not their fault; it is all weakness of the brain. 
Any new thought, especially of a high kind, creates a disturbance, tries to make 
a new channel, as it were, in the brain matter, and that unhinges the system, 
throws men off their balance. They are used to certain surroundings, and have 
to overcome a huge mass of ancient superstitions, ancestral superstition, class 
superstition, city superstition, country superstition, and behind all, the vast 
mass of superstition that is innate in every human being. Yet there are a few 
brave souls in the world who dare to conceive the truth, who dare to take it up, 
and who dare to follow it to the end. 

What does the Advaitist declare? He says, if there is a God, that God must be 
both the material and the efficient cause of the universe. Not only is He the 
creator, but He is also the created. He Himself is this universe. How can that 


be? God, the pure, the spirit, has become the universe? Yes; apparently so. That 
which all ignorant people see as the universe does not really exist. What are 
you and I and all these things we see? Mere self-hypnotism; there is but one 
Existence, the Infinite, the Ever-blessed One. In that Existence we dream all 
these various dreams. It is the Atman, beyond, all, the Infinite, beyond the 
known, beyond the knowable; in and through That we see the universe. It is the 
only Reality. It is this table; It is the audience before me; It is the wall; It is 
everything, minus the name and form. Take away the form of the table, take 
away the name; what remains is It. The Vedantist does not call It either He or 
She — these are fictions, delusions of the human brain — there is no sex in the 
soul. People who are under illusion, who have become like animals, see a 
woman or a man; living gods do not see men or women. How can they who are 
beyond everything have any sex idea? Everyone and everything is the Atman 
— the Self — the sexless, the pure, the ever-blessed. It is the name, the form, 
the body, which are material, and they make all this difference. If you take 
away these two differences of name and form, the whole universe is one; there 
are no two, but one everywhere. You and I are one. There is neither nature, nor 
God, nor the universe, only that one Infinite Existence, out of which, through 
name and form, all these are manufactured. How to know the Knower? It 
cannot be known. How can you see your own Self? You can only reflect 
yourself. So all this universe is the reflection of that One Eternal Being, the 
Atman, and as the reflection falls upon good or bad reflectors, so good or bad 
images are cast up. Thus in the murderer, the reflector is bad and not the Self. 

In the saint the reflector is pure. The Self — the Atman — is by Its own nature 
pure. It is the same, the one Existence of the universe that is reflecting Itself 
from the lowest worm to the highest and most perfect being. The whole of this 
universe is one Unity, one Existence, physically, mentally, morally and 
spiritually. We are looking upon this one Existence in different forms and 
creating all these images upon It. To the being who has limited himself to the 
condition of man. It appears as the world of man. To the being who is on a 
higher plane of existence. It may seem like heaven. There is but one Soul in the 
universe, not two. It neither comes nor goes. It is neither born, nor dies, nor 
reincarnates. How can It die? Where can It go? All these heavens, all these 
earths, and all these places are vain imaginations of the mind. They do not 
exist, never existed in the past, and never will exist in the future. 







I am omnipresent, eternal. Where can I go? Where am I not already? I am 
reading this book of nature. Page after page I am finishing and turning over, 
and one dream of life after another goes Away. Another page of life is turned 
over; another dream of life comes, and it goes away, rolling and rolling, and 
when I have finished my reading, I let it go and stand aside, I throw away the 
book, and the whole thing is finished. What does the Advaitist preach? He 
dethrones all the gods that ever existed, or ever will exist in the universe and 
places on that throne the Self of man, the Atman, higher than the sun and the 
moon, higher than the heavens, greater than this great universe itself. No books, 
no scriptures, no science can ever imagine the glory of the Self that appears as 
man, the most glorious God that ever was, the only God that ever existed, 
exists, or ever will exist. I am to worship, therefore, none but myself. "I 
worship my Self," says the Advaitist. To whom shall I bow down? I salute my 
Self. To whom shall I go for help? Who can help me, the Infinite Being of the 
universe? These are foolish dreams, hallucinations; who ever helped any one? 
None. Wherever you see a weak man, a dualist, weeping and wailing for help 
from somewhere above the skies, it is because he does not know that the skies 
also are in him. He wants help from the skies, and the help comes. We see that 
it comes; but it comes from within himself, and he mistakes it as coming from 
without. Sometimes a sick man lying on his bed may hear a tap on the door. He 
gets up and opens it and finds no one there. He goes back to bed, and again he 
hears a tap. He gets up and opens the door. Nobody is there. At last he finds 
that it was his own heartbeat which he fancied was a knock at the door. Thus 
man, after this vain search after various gods outside himself, completes the 
circle, and comes back to the point from which he started — the human soul, 
and he finds that the God whom he was searching in hill and dale, whom he 
was seeking in every brook, in every temple, in churches and heavens, that God 
whom he was even imagining as sitting in heaven and ruling the world, is his 
own Self. I am He, and He is I. None but I was God, and this little I never 
existed. 

Yet, how could that perfect God have been deluded? He never was. How could 
a perfect God have been dreaming? He never dreamed. Truth never dreams. 

The very question as to whence this illusion arose is absurd. Illusion arises 
from illusion alone. There will be no illusion as soon as the truth is seen. 
Illusion always rests upon illusion; it never rests upon God, the Truth, the 


Atman. You are never in illusion; it is illusion that is in you, before you. A 
cloud is here; another comes and pushes it aside and takes its place. Still 
another comes and pushes that one away. As before the eternal blue sky, clouds 
of various hue and colour come, remain for a short time and disappear, leaving 
it the same eternal blue, even so are you, eternally pure, eternally perfect. You 
are the veritable Gods of the universe; nay, there are not two — there is but 
One. It is a mistake to say, "you and I"; say "I". It is I who am eating in 
millions of mouths; how can I be hungry? It is I who am working through an 
infinite number of hands; how can I be inactive? It is I who am living the life of 
the whole universe; where is death for me? I am beyond all life, beyond all 
death. Where shall I seek for freedom? I am free by my nature. Who can bind 
me — the God of this universe? The scriptures of the world are but little maps, 
wanting to delineate my glory, who am the only existence of the universe. Then 
what are these books to me? Thus says the Advaitist. 

"Know the truth and be free in a moment." All the darkness will then vanish. 
When man has seen himself as one with the Infinite Being of the universe, 
when all separateness has ceased, when all men and women, an gods and 
angels, all animals and plants, and the whole universe have melted into that 
Oneness, then all fear disappears. Can I hurt myself? Can I kill myself? Can I 
injure myself? Whom to fear? Can you fear yourself? Then will all sorrow 
disappear. What can cause me sorrow? I am the One Existence of the universe. 
Then all jealousies will disappear; of whom to be jealous? Of myself? Then all 
bad feelings disappear. Against whom can I have bad feeling? Against myself? 
There is none in the universe but I. And this is the one way, says the Vedantist, 
to Knowledge. Kill out this differentiation, kill out this superstition that there 
are many. "He who in this world of many sees that One, he who in this mass of 
insentiency sees that one Sentient Being, he who in this world of shadows 
catches that Reality, unto him belongs eternal peace, unto none else, unto none 
else." 

These are the salient points of the three steps which Indian religious thought 
has taken in regard to God. We have seen that it began with the Personal, the 
extra-cosmic God. It went from the external to the internal cosmic body, God 
immanent in the universe, and ended in identifying the soul itself with that 
God, and making one Soul, a unit of all these various manifestations in the 


universe. This is the last word of the Vedas. It begins with dualism, goes 
through a qualified monism and ends in perfect monism. We know how very 
few in this world can come to the last, or even dare believe in it, and fewer still 
dare act according to it. Yet we know that therein lies the explanation of all 
ethics, of all morality and all spirituality in the universe. Why is it that every 
one says, "Do good to others?" Where is the explanation? Why is it that all 
great men have preached the brotherhood of mankind, and greater men the 
brotherhood of all lives? Because whether they were conscious of it or not, 
behind all that, through all their irrational and personal superstitions, was 
peering forth the eternal light of the Self denying all manifoldness, and 
asserting that the whole universe is but one. 

Again, the last word gave us one universe, which through the senses we see as 
matter, through the intellect as souls, and through the spirit as God. To the man 
who throws upon himself veils, which the world calls wickedness and evil, this 
very universe will change and become a hideous place; to another man, who 
wants enjoyments, this very universe will change its appearance and become a 
heaven, and to the perfect man the whole thing will vanish and become his own 
Self. 

Now, as society exists at the present time, all these three stages are necessary; 
the one does not deny the other, one is simply the fulfilment of the other. The 
Advaitist or the qualified Advaitist does not say that dualism is wrong; it is a 
right view, but a lower one. It is on the way to truth; therefore let everybody 
work out his own vision of this universe, according to his own ideas. Injure 
none, deny the position of none; take man where he stands and, if you can, lend 
him a helping hand and put him on a higher platform, but do not injure and do 
not destroy. All will come to truth in the long run. "When all the desires of the 
heart will be vanquished, then this very mortal will become immortal" — then 
the very man will become God. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XIV 

THE ATMAN: ITS BONDAGE AND FREEDOM 

{Delivered in America) 

According to the Advaita philosophy, there is only one thing real in the 
universe, which it calls Brahman; everything else is unreal, manifested and 
manufactured out of Brahman by the power of Maya. To reach back to that 
Brahman is our goal. We are, each one of us, that Brahman, that Reality, plus 
this Maya. If we can get rid of this Maya or ignorance, then we become what 
we really are. According to this philosophy, each man consists of three parts — 
the body, the internal organ or the mind, and behind that, what is called the 
Atman, the Self. The body is the external coating and the mind is the internal 
coating of the Atman who is the real perceiver, the real enjoyer, the being in 
the body who is working the body by means of the internal organ or the mind. 

_ A. 

The Atman is the only existence in the human body which is immaterial. 
Because it is immaterial, it cannot be a compound, and because it is not a 
compound, it does not obey the law of cause and effect, and so it is immortal. 
That which is immortal can have no beginning because everything with a 
beginning must have an end. It also follows that it must be formless; there 
cannot be any fond without matter. Everything that has form must have a 
beginning and an end. We have none of us seen a form which had not a 
beginning and will not have an end. A form comes out of a combination of 
force and matter. This chair has a peculiar form, that is to say a certain quantity 
of matter is acted upon by a certain amount of force and made to assume a 
particular shape. The shape is the result of a combination of matter and force. 
The combination cannot be eternal; there must come to every combination a 
time when it will dissolve. So all forms have a beginning and an end. We know 
our body will perish; it had a beginning and it will have an end. But the Self 
having no form, cannot be bound by the law of beginning and end. It is existing 
from infinite time; just as time is eternal, so is the Self of man eternal. 

Secondly, it must be all-pervading. It is only form that is conditioned and 
limited by space; that which is formless cannot be confined in space. So, 







according to Advaita Vedanta, the Self, the Atman, in you, in me, in every one, 
is omnipresent. You are as much in the sun now as in this earth, as much in 
England as in America. But the Self acts through the mind and the body, and 
where they are, its action is visible. 

Each work we do, each thought we think, produces an impression, called in 
Sanskrit Samskara, upon the mind and the sum total of these impressions 
becomes the tremendous force which is called "character". The character of a 
man is what he has created for himself; it is the result of the mental and 
physical actions that he has done in his life. The sum total of the Samskaras is 
the force which gives a man the next direction after death. A man dies; the 
body falls away and goes back to the elements; but the Samskaras remain, 
adhering to the mind which, being made of fine material, does not dissolve, 
because the finer the material, the more persistent it is. But the mind also 
dissolves in the long run, and that is what we are struggling for. In this 
connection, the best illustration that comes to my mind is that of the whirlwind. 
Different currents of air coming from different directions meet and at the 
meeting-point become united and go on rotating; as they rotate, they form a 
body of dust, drawing in bits of paper, straw, etc., at one place, only to drop 
them and go on to another, and so go on rotating, raising and forming bodies 
out of the materials which are before them. Even so the forces, called Prana in 
Sanskrit, come together and form the body and the mind out of matter, and 
move on until the body falls down, when they raise other materials to make 
another body, and when this falls, another rises, and thus the process goes on. 
Eorce cannot travel without matter. So when the body falls down, the mind- 
stuff remains. Prana in the form of Samskaras acting on it; and then it goes on 
to another point, raises up another whirl from fresh materials, and begins 
another motion; and so it travels from place to place until the force is all spent; 
and then it falls down, ended. So when the mind will end, be broken to pieces 
entirely, without leaving any Samskara, we shall be entirely free, and until that 
time we are in bondage; until then the Atman is covered by the whirl of the 
mind, and imagines it is being taken from place to place. When the whirl falls 
down, the Atman finds that It is all-pervading. It can go where It likes, is 
entirely free, and is able to manufacture any number of minds or bodies It likes; 
but until then It can go only with the whirl. This freedom is the goal towards 
which we are all moving. 


Suppose there is a ball in this room, and we each have a mallet in our hands 
and begin to strike the ball, giving it hundreds of blows, driving it from point to 
point, until at last it flies out of the room. With what force and in what direction 
will it go out? These will be determined by the forces that have been acting 
upon it all through the room. All the different blows that have been given will 
have their effects. Each one of our actions, mental and physical, is such a blow. 
The human mind is a ball which is being hit. We are being hit about this room 
of the world all the time, and our passage out of it is determined by the force of 
all these blows. In each case, the speed and direction of the ball is determined 
by the hits it has received; so all our actions in this world will determine our 
future birth. Our present birth, therefore, is the result of our past. This is one 
case: suppose I give you an endless chain, in which there is a black link and a 
white link alternately, without beginning and without end, and suppose I ask 
you the nature of the chain. At first you will find a difficulty in determining its 
nature, the chain being infinite at both ends, but slowly you find out it is a 
chain. You soon discover that this infinite chain is a repetition of the two links, 
black and white, and these multiplied infinitely become a whole chain. If you 
know the nature of one of these links, you know the nature of the whole chain, 
because it is a perfect repetition. All our lives, past, present, and future, form, 
as it were, an infinite chain, without beginning and without end, each link of 
which is one life, with two ends, birth and death. What we are and do here is 
being repeated again and again, with but little variation. So if we know these 
two links, we shall know all the passages we shall have to pass through in this 
world. We see, therefore, that our passage into this world has been exactly 
determined by our previous passages. Similarly we are in this world by our 
own actions. Just as we go out with the sum total of our present actions upon 
us, so we see that we come into it with the sum total of our past actions upon 
us; that which takes us out is the very same thing that brings us in. What brings 
us in? Our past deeds. What takes us out? Our own deeds here, and so on and 
on we go. Like the caterpillar that takes the thread from its own mouth and 
builds its cocoon and at last finds itself caught inside the cocoon, we have 
bound ourselves by our own actions, we have thrown the network of our 
actions around ourselves. We have set the law of causation in motion, and we 
find it hard to get ourselves out of it. We have set the wheel in motion, and we 
are being crushed under it. So this philosophy teaches us that we are uniformly 


being bound by our own actions, good or bad. 

The Atman never comes nor goes, is never born nor dies. It is nature moving 
before the Atman, and the reflection of this motion is on the Atman; and the 
Atman ignorantly thinks it is moving, and not nature. When the Atman thinks 
that, it is in bondage; but when it comes to find it never moves, that it is 
omnipresent, then freedom comes. The Atman in bondage is called Jiva. Thus 
you see that when it is said that the Atman comes and goes, it is said only for 
facility of understanding, just as for convenience in studying astronomy you are 
asked to suppose that the sun moves round the earth, though such is not the 
case. So the Jiva, the soul, comes to higher or lower states. This is the well- 
known law of reincarnation; and this law binds all creation. 

People in this country think it too horrible that man should come up from an 
animal. Why? What will be the end of these millions of animals? Are they 
nothing? If we have a soul, so have they, and if they have none, neither have 
we. It is absurd to say that man alone has a soul, and the animals none. I have 
seen men worse than animals. 

The human soul has sojourned in lower and higher forms, migrating from one 
to another, according to the Samskaras or impressions, but it is only in the 
highest form as man that it attains to freedom. The man form is higher than 
even the angel form, and of all forms it is the highest; man is the highest being 
in creation, because he attains to freedom. 

All this universe was in Brahman, and it was, as it were, projected out of Him, 
and has been moving on to go back to the source from which it was projected, 
like the electricity which comes out of the dynamo, completes the circuit, and 
returns to it. The same is the case with the soul. Projected from Brahman, it 
passed through all sorts of vegetable and animal forms, and at last it is in man, 
and man is the nearest approach to Brahman. To go back to Brahman from 
which we have been projected is the great struggle of life. Whether people 
know it or not does not matter. In the universe, whatever we see of motion, of 
struggles in minerals or plants or animals is an effort to come back to the centre 
and be at rest. There was an equilibrium, and that has been destroyed; and all 
parts and atoms and molecules are struggling to find their lost equilibrium 


again. In this struggle they are combining and re-forming, giving rise to all the 
wonderful phenomena of nature. All struggles and competitions in animal life, 
plant life, and everywhere else, all social struggles and wars are but expressions 
of that eternal struggle to get back to that equilibrium. 

The going from birth to death, this travelling, is what is called Samsara in 
Sanskrit, the round of birth and death literally. All creation, passing through 
this round, will sooner or later become free. The question may be raised that if 
we all shall come to freedom, why should we struggle to attain it? If every one 
is going to be free, we will sit down and wait. It is true that every being will 
become free, sooner or later; no one can be lost. Nothing can come to 
destruction; everything must come up. If that is so, what is the use of our 
struggling? In the first place, the struggle is the only means that will bring us to 
the centre, and in the second place, we do not know why we struggle. We have 
to. "Of thousands of men some are awakened to the idea that they will become 
free." The vast masses of mankind are content with material things, but there 
are some who awake, and want to get back, who have had enough of this 
playing, down here. These struggle consciously, while the rest do it 
unconsciously. 

The alpha and omega of Vedanta philosophy is to "give up the world," giving 
up the unreal and taking the real. Those who are enamoured of the world may 
ask, "Why should we attempt to get out of it, to go back to the centre? Suppose 
we have all come from God, but we find this world is pleasurable and nice; 
then why should we not rather try to get more and more of the world? Why 
should we try to get out of it?" They say, look at the wonderful improvements 
going on in the world every day, how much luxury is being manufactured for it. 
This is very enjoyable. Why should we go away, and strive for something 
which is not this? The answer is that the world is certain to die, to be broken 
into pieces and that many times we have had the same enjoyments. All the 
forms which we are seeing now have been manifested again and again, and the 
world in which we live has been here many times before. I have been here and 
talked to you many times before. You will know that it must be so, and the very 
words that you have been listening to now, you have heard many times before. 
And many times more it will be the same. Souls were never different, the 
bodies have been constantly dissolving and recurring. Secondly, these things 


periodically occur. Suppose here are three or four dice, and when we throw 
them, one comes up five, another four, another three, and another two. If you 
keep on throwing, there must come times when those very same numbers will 
recur. Go on throwing, and no matter how long may be the interval, those 
numbers must come again. It cannot be asserted in how many throws they will 
come again; this is the law of chance. So with souls and their associations. 
However distant may be the periods, the same combinations and dissolutions 
will happen again and again. The same birth, eating and drinking, and then 
death, come round again and again. Some never find anything higher than the 
enjoyments of the world, but those who want to soar higher find that these 
enjoyments are never final, are only by the way. 

Every form, let us say, beginning from the little worm and ending in man, is 
like one of the cars of the Chicago Ferris Wheel which is in motion all the time, 
but the occupants change. A man goes into a car, moves with the wheel, and 
comes out. The wheel goes on and on. A soul enters one form, resides in it for a 
time, then leaves it and goes into another and quits that again for a third. Thus 
the round goes on till it comes out of the wheel and becomes free. 

Astonishing powers of reading the past and the future of a man's life have been 
known in every country and every age. The explanation is that so long as the 
Atman is within the realm of causation — though its inherent freedom is not 
entirely lost and can assert itself, even to the extent of taking the soul out of the 
causal chain, as it does in the case of men who become free — its actions are 
greatly influenced by the causal law and thus make it possible for men, 
possessed with the insight to trace the sequence of effects, to tell the past and 
the future. 

So long as there is desire or want, it is a sure sign that there is imperfection. A 
perfect, free being cannot have any desire. God cannot want anything. If He 
desires. He cannot be God. He will be imperfect. So all the talk about God 
desiring this and that, and becoming angry and pleased by turns is babies' talk, 
but means nothing. Therefore it has been taught by all teachers, "Desire 
nothing, give up all desires and be perfectly satisfied." 

A child comes into the world crawling and without teeth, and the old man gets 




out without teeth and crawling. The extremes are alike, but the one has no 
experience of the life before him, while the other has gone through it all. When 
the vibrations of ether are very low, we do not see light, it is darkness; when 
very high, the result is also darkness. The extremes generally appear to be the 
same, though one is as distant from the other as the poles. The wall has no 
desires, so neither has the perfect man. But the wall is not sentient enough to 
desire, while for the perfect man there is nothing to desire. There are idiots who 
have no desires in this world, because their brain is imperfect. At the same 
time, the highest state is when we have no desires, but the two are opposite 
poles of the same existence. One is near the animal, and the other near to God. 

» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Jnana-Yoga / 


CHAPTER XIV 

THE REAL AND THE APPARENT MAN 

{Delivered in New York) 

Here we stand, and our eyes look forward sometimes miles ahead. Man has 
been doing that since he began to think. He is always looking forward, looking 
ahead. He wants to know where he goes even after the dissolution of his body. 
Various theories have been propounded, system after system has been brought 
forward to suggest explanations. Some have been rejected, while others have 
been accepted, and thus it will go on, so long as man is here, so long as man 
thinks. There is some truth in each of these systems. There is a good deal of 
what is not truth in all of them. I shall try to place before you the sum and 
substance, the result, of the inquiries in this line that have been made in India. I 
shall try to harmonise the various thoughts on the subject, as they have come 
up from time to time among Indian philosophers. I shall try to harmonise the 
psychologists and the metaphysicians, and, if possible, I shall harmonise them 
with modern scientific thinkers also. 

The one theme of the Vedanta philosophy is the search after unity. The Hindu 
mind does not care for the particular; it is always after the general, nay, the 
universal. "What is that, by knowing which everything else is to be known?" 
That is the one theme. "As through the knowledge of one lump of clay all that 
is of clay is known, so, what is that, by knowing which this whole universe 
itself will be known?" That is the one search. The whole of this universe, 
according to the Hindu philosophers, can be resolved into one material, which 

A. 

they call Akasha. Everything that we see around us, feel, touch, taste, is simply 
a differentiated manifestation of this Akasha. It is all-pervading, fine. All that 
we call solids, liquids, or gases, figures, forms, or bodies, the earth, sun, moon, 
and stars — everything is composed of this Akasha. 

What force is it which acts upon this Akasha and manufactures this universe 
out of it? Along with Akasha exists universal power; all that is power in the 
universe, manifesting as force or attraction — nay, even as thought — is but a 









different manifestation of that one power which the Hindus call Prana. This 
Prana, acting on Akasha, is creating the whole of this universe. In the 
beginning of a cycle, this Prana, as it were, sleeps in the infinite ocean of 
Akasha. It existed motionless in the beginning. Then arises motion in this 
ocean of Akasha by the action of this Prana, and as this Prana begins to move, 
to vibrate, out of this ocean come the various celestial systems, suns, moons, 
stars, earth, human beings, animals, plants, and the manifestations of all the 
various forces and phenomena. Every manifestation of power, therefore, 
according to them, is this Prana. Every material manifestation is Akasha. When 
this cycle will end, all that we call solid will melt away into the next form, the 
next finer or the liquid form; that will melt into the gaseous, and that into finer 
and more uniform heat vibrations, and all will melt back into the original 
Akasha, and what we now call attraction, repulsion, and motion, will slowly 
resolve into the original Prana. Then this Prana is said to sleep for a period, 
again to emerge and to throw out all those forms; and when this period will 
end, the whole thing will subside again. Thus this process of creation is going 
down, and coming up, oscillating backwards and forwards. In the language of 
modern science, it is becoming static during one period, and during another 
period it is becoming dynamic. At one time it becomes potential, and at the 
next period it becomes active. This alteration has gone on through eternity. 

Yet, this analysis is only partial. This much has been known even to modern 
physical science. Beyond that, the research of physical science cannot reach. 
But the inquiry does not stop in consequence. We have not yet found that one, 
by knowing which everything else will be known. We have resolved the whole 
universe into two components, into what are called matter and energy, or what 
the ancient philosophers of India called Akasha and Prana. The next step is to 
resolve this Akasha and the Prana into their origin. Both can be resolved into 
the still higher entity which is called mind. It is out of mind, the Mahat, the 
universally existing thought-power, that these two have been produced. 
Thought, is a still finer manifestation of being than either Akasha or Prana. It is 
thought that splits itself into these two. The universal thought existed in the 
beginning, and that manifested, changed, evolved itself into these two Akasha 
and Prana: and by the combination of these two the whole universe has been 
produced. 


We next come to psychology. I am looking at you. The external sensations are 
brought to me by the eyes; they are carried by the sensory nerves to the brain. 
The eyes are not the organs of vision. They are but the external instruments, 
because if the real organ behind, that which carries the sensation to the brain, is 
destroyed, I may have twenty eyes, yet I cannot see you. The picture on the 
retina may be as complete as possible, yet I shall not see you. Therefore, the 
organ is different from its instruments; behind the instruments, the eyes, there 
must be the organ So it is with all the sensations. The nose is not the sense of 
smell; it is but the instrument, and behind it is the organ. With every sense we 
have, there is first the external instrument in the physical body; behind that, in 
the same physical body, there is the organ; yet these are not sufficient. Suppose 
I am talking to you, and you are listening to me with close attention. Something 
happens, say, a bell rings; you will not, perhaps, hear the bell ring. The 
pulsations of that sound came to your ear, struck the tympanum, the impression 
was carried by the nerve into the brain; if the whole process was complete up to 
carrying the impulse to the brain, why did you not hear? Something else was 
wanting — the mind was not attached to the organ. When the mind detaches 
itself from the organ, the organ may bring any news to it, but the mind will not 
receive it. When it attaches itself to the organ, then alone is it possible for the 
mind to receive the news. Yet, even that does not complete the whole. The 
instruments may bring the sensation from outside, the organs may carry it 
inside, the mind may attach itself to the organ, and yet the perception may not 
be complete. One more factor is necessary; there must be a reaction within. 
With this reaction comes knowledge. That which is outside sends, as it were, 
the current of news into my brain. My mind takes it up, and presents it to the 
intellect, which groups it in relation to pre-received impressions and sends a 
current of reaction, and with that reaction comes perception. Here, then, is the 
will. The state of mind which reacts is called Buddhi, the intellect. Yet, even 
this does not complete the whole. One step more is required. Suppose here is a 
camera and there is a sheet of cloth, and I try to throw a picture on that sheet. 
What am I to do? I am to guide various rays of light through the camera to fall 
upon the sheet and become grouped there. Something is necessary to have the 
picture thrown upon, which does not move. I cannot form a picture upon 
something which is moving; that something must be stationary, because the 
rays of light which I throw on it are moving, and these moving rays of light, 
must be gathered, unified, co-ordinated, and completed upon something which 


is stationary. Similar is the case with the sensations which these organs of ours 
are carrying inside and presenting to the mind, and which the mind in its turn is 
presenting to the intellect. This process will not be complete unless there is 
something permanent in the background upon which the picture, as it were, 
may be formed, upon which we may unify all the different impressions. What 
is it that gives unity to the changing whole of our being? What is it that keeps 
up the identity of the moving thing moment after moment? What is it upon 
which all our different impressions are pieced together, upon which the 
perceptions, as it were, come together, reside, and form a united whole? We 
have found that to serve this end there must be something, and we also see that 
that something must be, relatively to the body and mind, motionless. The sheet 
of cloth upon which the camera throws the picture is, relatively to the rays of 
light, motionless, else there will be no picture. That is to say, the perceiver 
must be an individual. This something upon which the mind is painting all 
these pictures, this something upon which our sensations, carried by the mind 
and intellect, are placed and grouped and formed into a unity, is what is called 
the soul of man. 

We have seen that it is the universal cosmic mind that splits itself into the 
Akasha and Prana, and beyond mind we have found the soul in us. In the 
universe, behind the universal mind, there is a Soul that exists, and it is called 
God. In the individual it is the soul of man. In this universe, in the cosmos, just 
as the universal mind becomes evolved into Akasha and Prana, even so, we 
may find that the Universal Soul Itself becomes evolved as mind. Is it really so 
with the individual man? Is his mind the creator of his body, and his soul the 
creator of his mind? That is to say, are his body, his mind, and his soul three 
different existences or are they three in one or, again, are they different states 
of existence of the same unit being? We shall gradually try to find an answer to 
this question. The first step that we have now gained is this: here is this 
external body, behind this external body are the organs, the mind, the intellect, 
and behind this is the soul. At the first step, we have found, as it were, that the 
soul is separate from the body, separate from the mind itself. Opinions in the 
religious world become divided at this point, and the departure is this. All those 
religious views which generally pass under the name of dualism hold that this 
soul is qualified, that it is of various qualities, that all feelings of enjoyment, 
pleasure, and pain really belong to the soul. The non-dualists deny that the soul 


has any such qualities; they say it is unqualified. 

Let me first take up the dualists, and try to present to you their position with 
regard to the soul and its destiny; next, the system that contradicts them; and 
lastly, let us try to find the harmony which non-dualism will bring to us. This 
soul of man, because it is separate from the mind and body, because it is not 
composed of Akasha and Prana, must be immortal. Why? What do we mean by 
mortality? Decomposition. And that is only possible for things that are the 
result of composition; anything that is made of two or three ingredients must 
become decomposed. That alone which is not the result of composition can 
never become decomposed, and, therefore, can never die. It is immortal. It has 
been existing throughout eternity; it is uncreate. Every item of creation is 
simply a composition; no one ever saw creation come out of nothing. All that 
we know of creation is the combination of already existing things into newer 
forms. That being so, this soul of man, being simple, must have been existing 
for ever, and it will exist for ever. When this body falls off, the soul lives on. 
According to the Vedantists, when this body dissolves, the vital forces of the 
man go back to his mind and the mind becomes dissolved, as it were, into the 
Prana, and that Prana enters into the soul of man, and the soul of man comes 
out, clothed, as it were, with what they call the fine body, the mental body, or 
spiritual body, as you may like to call it. In this body are the Samskaras of the 
man. What are the Samskaras? This mind is like a lake, and every thought is 
like a wave upon that lake. Just as in the lake waves rise and then fall down and 
disappear, so these thought-waves are continually rising in the mind-stuff and 
then disappearing, but they do not disappear for ever. They become finer and 
finer, but they are all there, ready to start up at another time when called upon 
to do so. Memory is simply calling back into waveform some of those thoughts 
which have gone into that finer state of existence. Thus, everything that we 
have thought, every action that we have done, is lodged in the mind; it is all 
there in fine form, and when a man dies, the sum total of these impressions is in 
the mind, which again works upon a little fine material as a medium. The soul, 
clothed, as it were, with these impressions and the fine body, passes out, and 
the destiny of the soul is guided by the resultant of all the different forces 
represented by the different impressions. According to us, there are three 
different goals for the soul. 


Those that are very spiritual, when they die, follow the solar rays and reach 
what is called the solar sphere, through which they reach what is called the 
lunar sphere, and through that they reach what is called the sphere of lightning, 
and there they meet with another soul who is already blessed, and he guides the 
new-comer forward to the highest of all spheres, which is called the 
Brahmaloka, the sphere of Brahma. There these souls attain to omniscience and 
omnipotence, become almost as powerful and all-knowing as God Himself; and 
they reside there for ever, according to the dualists, or, according to the non¬ 
dualists, they become one with the Universal at the end of the cycle. The next 
class of persons, who have been doing good work with selfish motives, are 
carried by the results of their good works, when they die, to what is called lunar 
sphere, where there are various heavens, and there they acquire fine bodies, the 
bodies of gods. They become gods and live there and enjoy the blessing of 
heaven for a long period; and after that period is finished, the old Karma is 
again upon them, and so they fall back again to the earth; they come down 
through the spheres of air and clouds and all these various regions, and, at last, 
reach the earth through raindrops. There on the earth they attach themselves to 
some cereal which is eventually eaten by some man who is fit to supply them 
with material to make a new body. The last class, namely, the wicked, when 
they die, become ghosts or demons, and live somewhere midway between the 
lunar sphere and this earth. Some try to disturb mankind, some are friendly; 
and after living there for some time they also fall back to the earth and become 
animals. After living for some time in an animal body they get released, and 
come back, and become men again, and thus get one more chance to work out 
their salvation. We see, then, that those who have nearly attained to perfection, 
in whom only very little of impurity remains, go to the Brahmaloka through the 
rays of the sun; those who were a middling sort of people, who did some good 
work here with the idea of going to heaven, go to the heavens in the lunar 
sphere and there obtain god-bodies; but they have again to become men and so 
have one more chance to become perfect. Those that are very wicked become 
ghosts and demons, and then they may have to become animals; after that they 
become men again and get another chance to perfect themselves. This earth is 
called the Karma-Bhumi, the sphere of Karma. Here alone man makes his good 
or bad Karma. When a man wants to go to heaven and does good works for that 
purpose, he becomes as good and does not as such store up any bad Karma. He 
Just enjoys the effects of the good work he did on earth; and when this good 


Karma is exhausted, there come, upon him the resultant force of all the evil 
Karma he had previously stored up in life, and that brings him down again to 
this earth. In the same way, those that become ghosts remain in that state, not 
giving rise to fresh Karma, but suffer the evil results of their past misdeeds, and 
later on remain for a time in an animal body without causing any fresh Karma. 
When that period is finished, they too become men again. The states of reward 
and punishment due to good and bad Karmas are devoid of the force generating 
fresh Karmas; they have only to be enjoyed or suffered. If there is an 
extraordinarily good or an extraordinarily evil Karma, it bears fruit very 
quickly. For instance, if a man has been doing many evil things all his life, but 
does one good act, the result of that good act will immediately appear, but 
when that result has been gone through, all the evil acts must produce their 
results also. All men who do certain good and great acts, but the general tenor 
of whose lives has not been correct, will become gods; and after living for 
some time in god-bodies, enjoying the powers of gods, they will have again to 
become men; when the power of the good acts is thus finished, the old evil 
comes up to be worked out. Those who do extraordinarily evil acts have to put 
on ghost and devil bodies, and when the effect of those evil actions is 
exhausted, the little good action which remains associated with them, makes 
them again become men. The way to Brahmaloka, from which there is no more 
fall or return, is called the Devayana, i.e. the way to God; the way to heaven is 
known as Pitriyana, i.e. the way to the fathers. 

Man, therefore, according to the Vedanta philosophy, is the greatest being that 
is in the universe, and this world of work the best place in it, because only 
herein is the greatest and the best chance for him to become perfect. Angels or 
gods, whatever you may call them, have all to become men, if they want to 
become perfect. This is the great centre, the wonderful poise, and the 
wonderful opportunity — this human life. 

We come next to the other aspect of philosophy. There are Buddhists who deny 
the whole theory of the soul that I have just now been propounding. "What use 
is there," says the Buddhist, "to assume something as the substratum, as the 
background of this body and mind? Why may we not allow thoughts to run on? 
Why admit a third substance beyond this organism, composed of mind and 
body, a third substance called the soul? What is its use? Is not this organism 



sufficient to explain itself? Why take anew a third something?" These 
arguments are very powerful. This reasoning is very strong. So far as outside 
research goes, we see that this organism is a sufficient explanation of itself — 
at least, many of us see it in that light. Why then need there be a soul as 
substratum, as a something which is neither mind nor body but stands as a 
background for both mind and body? Let there be only mind and body. Body is 
the name of a stream of matter continuously changing. Mind is the name of a 
stream of consciousness or thought continuously changing. What produces the 
apparent unity between these two? This unity does not really exist, let us say. 
Take, for instance, a lighted torch, and whirl it rapidly before you. You see a 
circle of fire. The circle does not really exist, but because the torch is 
continually moving, it leaves the appearance of a circle. So there is no unity in 
this life; it is a mass of matter continually rushing down, and the whole of this 
matter you may call one unity, but no more. So is mind; each thought is 
separate from every other thought; it is only the rushing current that leaves 
behind the illusion of unity; there is no need of a third substance. This universal 
phenomenon of body and mind is all that really is; do not posit something 
behind it. You will find that this Buddhist thought has been taken up by certain 
sects and schools in modern times, and all of them claim that it is new — their 
own invention. This has been the central idea of most of the Buddhistic 
philosophies, that this world is itself all-sufficient; that you need not ask for 
any background at all; all that is, is this sense-universe: what is the use of 
thinking of something as a support to this universe? Everything is the aggregate 
of qualities; why should there be a hypothetical substance in which they should 
inhere? The idea of substance comes from the rapid interchange of qualities, 
not from something unchangeable which exists behind them. We see how 
wonderful some of these arguments are, and they appeal easily to the ordinary 
experience of humanity — in fact, not one in a million can think of anything 
other than phenomena. To the vast majority of men nature appears to be only a 
changing, whirling, combining, mingling mass of change. Few of us ever have 
a glimpse of the calm sea behind. For us it is always lashed into waves; this 
universe appears to us only as a tossing mass of waves. Thus we find these two 
opinions. One is that there is something behind both body and mind which is an 
unchangeable and immovable substance; and the other is that there is no such 
thing as immovability or unchangeability in the universe; it is all change and 
nothing but change. The solution of this difference comes in the next step of 





thought, namely, the non-dualistic. 

It says that the dualists are right in finding something behind all, as a 
background which does not change; we cannot conceive change without there 
being something unchangeable. We can only conceive of anything that is 
changeable, by knowing something which is less changeable, and this also 
must appear more changeable in comparison with something else which is less 
changeable, and so on and on, until we are bound to admit that there must be 
something which never changes at all. The whole of this manifestation must 
have been in a state of non-manifestation, calm and silent, being the balance of 
opposing forces, so to say, when no force operated, because force acts when a 
disturbance of the equilibrium comes in. The universe is ever hurrying on to 
return to that state of equilibrium again. If we are certain of any fact 
whatsoever, we are certain of this. When the dualists claim that there is a 
something which does not change, they are perfectly right, but their analysis 
that it is an underlying something which is neither the body nor the mind, a 
something separate from both, is wrong. So far as the Buddhists say that the 
whole universe is a mass of change, they are perfectly right; so long as I am 
separate from the universe, so long as I stand back and look at something 
before me, so long as there are two things — the looker-on and the thing 
looked upon — it will appear always that the universe is one of change, 
continuously changing all the time. But the reality is that there is both change 
and changelessness in this universe. It is not that the soul and the mind and the 
body are three separate existences, for this organism made of these three is 
really one. It is the same thing which appears as the body, as the mind, and as 
the thing beyond mind and body, but it is not at the same time all these. He 
who sees the body does not see the mind even, he who sees the mind does not 
see that which he calls the soul, and he who sees the soul — for him the body 
and mind have vanished. He who sees only motion never sees absolute calm, 
and he who sees absolute calm — for him motion has vanished. A rope is taken 
for a snake. He who sees the rope as the snake, for him the rope has vanished, 
and when the delusion ceases and he looks at the rope, the snake has vanished. 

There is then but one all-comprehending existence, and that one appears as 
manifold. This Self or Soul or Substance is all that exists in the universe. That 
Self or Substance or Soul is, in the language of non-dualism, the Brahman 





appearing to be manifold by the interposition of name and form. Look at the 
waves in the sea. Not one wave is really different from the sea, but what makes 
the wave apparently different? Name and form; the form of the wave and the 
name which we give to it, "wave". This is what makes it different from the sea. 
When name and form go, it is the same sea. Who can make any real difference 
between the wave and the sea? So this whole universe is that one Unit 
Existence; name and form have created all these various differences. As when 
the sun shines upon millions of globules of water, upon each particle is seen a 
most perfect representation of the sun, so the one Soul, the one Self, the one 
Existence of the universe, being reflected on all these numerous globules of 
varying names and forms, appears to be various. But it is in reality only one. 
There is no "I" nor "you"; it is all one. It is either all "I" or all "you". This idea 
of duality, calf two, is entirely false, and the whole universe, as we ordinarily 
know it, is the result of this false knowledge. When discrimination comes and 
man finds there are not two but one, he finds that he is himself this universe. "It 
is I who am this universe as it now exists, a continuous mass of change. It is I 
who am beyond all changes, beyond all qualities, the eternally perfect, the 
eternally blessed." 

There is, therefore, but one Atman, one Self, eternally pure, eternally perfect, 
unchangeable, unchanged; it has never changed; and all these various changes 
in the universe are but appearances in that one Self. 

Upon it name and form have painted all these dreams; it is the form that makes 
the wave different from the sea. Suppose the wave subsides, will the form 
remain? No, it will vanish. The existence of the wave was entirely dependent 
upon the existence of the sea, but the existence of the sea was not at all 
dependent upon the existence of the wave. The form remains so long as the 
wave remains, but as soon as the wave leaves it, it vanishes, it cannot remain. 
This name and form is the outcome of what is called Maya. It is this Maya that 
is making individuals, making one appear different from another. Yet it has no 
existence. Maya cannot be said to exist. Eorm cannot be said to exist, because it 
depends upon the existence of another thing. It cannot be said as not to exist, 
seeing that it makes all this difference. According to the Advaita philosophy, 
then, this Maya or ignorance — or name and form, or, as it has been called in 
Europe, "time, space, and causality" — is out of this one Infinite Existence 



showing us the manifoldness of the universe; in substance, this universe is one. 
So long as any one thinks that there are two ultimate realities, he is mistaken. 
When he has come to know that there is but one, he is right. This is what is 
being proved to us every day, on the physical plane, on the mental plane, and 
also on the spiritual plane. Today it has been demonstrated that you and I, the 
sun, the moon, and the stars are but the different names of different spots in the 
same ocean of matter, and that this matter is continuously changing in its 
configuration. This particle of energy that was in the sun several months ago 
may be in the human being now; tomorrow it may be in an animal, the day 
after tomorrow it may be in a plant. It is ever coming and going. It is all one 
unbroken, infinite mass of matter, only differentiated by names and forms. One 
point is called the sun; another, the moon; another, the stars; another, man; 
another, animal; another, plant; and so on. And all these names are fictitious; 
they have no reality, because the whole is a continuously changing mass of 
matter. This very same universe, from another standpoint, is an ocean of 
thought, where each one of us is a point called a particular mind. You are a 
mind, I am a mind, everyone is a mind; and the very same universe viewed 
from the standpoint of knowledge, when the eyes have been cleared of 
delusions, when the mind has become pure, appears to be the unbroken 
Absolute Being, the ever pure, the unchangeable, the immortal. 

What then becomes of all this threefold eschatology of the dualist, that when a 
man dies he goes to heaven, or goes to this or that sphere, and that the wicked 
persons become ghosts, and become animals, and so forth? None comes and 
none goes, says the non-dualist. How can you come and go? You are infinite; 
where is the place for you to go? In a certain school a number of little children 
were being examined. The examiner had foolishly put all sorts of difficult 
questions to the little children. Among others there was this question: "Why 
does not the earth fall ?" His intention was to bring out the idea of gravitation 
or some other intricate scientific truth from these children. Most of them could 
not even understand the question, and so they gave all sorts of wrong answers. 
But one bright little girl answered it with another question: "Where shall it 
fall?" The very question of the examiner was nonsense on the face of it. There 
is no up and down in the universe; the idea is only relative. So it is with regard 
to the soul; the very question of birth and death in regard to it is utter nonsense. 
Who goes and who comes? Where are you not? Where is the heaven that you 


are not in already? Omnipresent is the Self of man. Where is it to go? Where is 
it not to go? It is everywhere. So all this childish dream and puerile illusion of 
birth and death, of heavens and higher heavens and lower worlds, all vanish 
immediately for the perfect. For the nearly perfect it vanishes after showing 
them the several scenes up to Brahmaloka. It continues for the ignorant. 

How is it that the whole world believes in going to heaven, and in dying and 
being born? I am studying a book, page after page is being read and turned 
over. Another page comes and is turned over. Who changes? Who comes and 
goes? Not I, but the book. This whole nature is a book before the soul, chapter 
after chapter is being read and turned over, and every now and then a scene 
opens. That is read and turned over. A fresh one comes, but the soul is ever the 
same — eternal. It is nature that is changing, not the soul of man. This never 
changes. Birth and death are in nature, not in you. Yet the ignorant are deluded; 
just as we under delusion think that the sun is moving and not the earth, in 
exactly the same way we think that we are dying, and not nature. These are all, 
therefore, hallucinations. Just as it is a hallucination when we think that the 
fields are moving and not the railway train, exactly in the same manner is the 
hallucination of birth and death. When men are in a certain frame of mind, they 
see this very existence as the earth, as the sun, the moon, the stars; and all those 
who are in the same state of mind see the same things. Between you and me 
there may be millions of beings on different planes of existence. They will 
never see us, nor we them; we only see those who are in the same state of mind 
and on the same plane with us. Those musical instruments respond which have 
the same attunement of vibration, as it were; if the state of vibration, which 
they call "man-vibration", should be changed, no longer would men be seen 
here; the whole "man-universe" would vanish, and instead of that, other 
scenery would come before us, perhaps gods and the god-universe, or perhaps, 
for the wicked man, devils and the diabolic world; but all would be only 
different views of the one universe. It is this universe which, from the human 
plane, is seen as the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, and all such things — it 
is this very universe which, seen from the plane of wickedness, appears as a 
place of punishment. And this very universe is seen as heaven by those who 
want to see it as heaven. Those who have been dreaming of going to a God 
who is sitting on a throne, and of standing there praising Him all their lives, 
when they die, will simply see a vision of what they have in their minds; this 


very universe will simply change into a vast heaven, with all sorts of winged 
beings flying about and a God sitting on a throne. These heavens are all of 
man's own making. So what the dualist says is true, says the Advaitin, but it is 
all simply of his own making. These spheres and devils and gods and 
reincarnations and transmigrations are all mythology; so also is this human life. 
The great mistake that men always make is to think that this life alone is true. 
They understand it well enough when other things are called mythologies, but 
are never willing to admit the same of their own position. The whole thing as it 
appears is mere mythology, and the greatest of all lies is that we are bodies, 
which we never were nor even can be. It is the greatest of all lies that we are 
mere men; we are the God of the universe. In worshipping God we have been 
always worshipping our own hidden Self. The worst lie that you ever tell 
yourself is that you were born a sinner or a wicked man. He alone is a sinner 
who sees a sinner in another man. Suppose there is a baby here, and you place a 
bag of gold on the table. Suppose a robber comes and takes the gold away. To 
the baby it is all the same; because there is no robber inside, there is no robber 
outside. To sinners and vile men, there is vileness outside, but not to good men. 
So the wicked see this universe as a hell, and the partially good see it as 
heaven, while the perfect beings realise it as God Himself. Then alone the veil 
falls from the eyes, and the man, purified and cleansed, finds his whole vision 
changed. The bad dreams that have been torturing him for millions of years, all 
vanish, and he who was thinking of himself either as a man, or a god, or a 
demon, he who was thinking of himself as living in low places, in high places, 
on earth, in heaven, and so on, finds that he is really omnipresent; that all time 
is in him, and that he is not in time; that all the heavens are in him, that he is 
not in any heaven; and that all the gods that man ever worshipped are in him, 
and that he is not in any one of those gods. He was the manufacturer of gods 
and demons, of men and plants and animals and stones, and the real nature of 
man now stands unfolded to him as being higher than heaven, more perfect 
than this universe of ours, more infinite than infinite time, more omnipresent 
than the omnipresent ether. Thus alone man becomes fearless, and becomes 
free. Then all delusions cease, all miseries vanish, all fears come to an end for 
ever. Birth goes away and with it death; pains fly, and with them fly away 
pleasures; earths vanish, and with them vanish heavens; bodies vanish, and 
with them vanishes the mind also. For that man disappears the whole universe, 
as it were. This searching, moving, continuous struggle of forces stops for ever. 


and that which was manifesting itself as force and matter, as struggles of 
nature, as nature itself, as heavens and earths and plants and animals and men 
and angels, all that becomes transfigured into one infinite, unbreakable, 
unchangeable existence, and the knowing man finds that he is one with that 
existence. "Even as clouds of various colours come before the sky, remain 
there for a second and then vanish away," even so before this soul are all these 
visions coming, of earths and heavens, of the moon and the gods, of pleasures 
and pains; but they all pass away leaving the one infinite, blue, unchangeable 
sky. The sky never changes; it is the clouds that change. It is a mistake to think 
that the sky is changed. It is a mistake to think that we are impure, that we are 
limited, that we are separate. The real man is the one Unit Existence. 

Two questions now arise. The first is: "Is it possible to realise this? So far it is 
doctrine, philosophy, but is it possible to realise it?" It is. There are men still 
living in this world for whom delusion has vanished for ever. Do they 
immediately die after such realisation? Not so soon as we should think. Two 
wheels joined by one pole are running together. If I get hold of one of the 
wheels and, with an axe, cut the pole asunder, the wheel which I have got hold 
of stops, but upon the other wheel is its past momentum, so it runs on a little 
arid then falls down. This pure and perfect being, the soul, is one wheel, and 
this external hallucination of body and mind is the other wheel, joined together 
by the pole of work, of Karma. Knowledge is the axe which will sever the bond 
between the two, and the wheel of the soul will stop — stop thinking that it is 
coming and going, living and dying, stop thinking that it is nature and has 
wants and desires, and will find that it is perfect, desireless. But upon the other 
wheel, that of the body and mind, will be the momentum of past acts; so it will 
live for some time, until that momentum of past work is exhausted, until that 
momentum is worked away, and then the body and mind fall, and the soul 
becomes free. No more is there any going to heaven and coming back, not even 
any going to the Brahmaloka, or to any of the highest of the spheres, for where 
is he to come from, or to go to? The man who has in this life attained to this 
state, for whom, for a minute at least, the ordinary vision of the world has 
changed and the reality has been apparent, he is called the "Living Eree". This 
is the goal of the Vedantin, to attain freedom while living. 

Once in Western India I was travelling in the desert country on the coast of the 



Indian Ocean. For days and days I used to travel on foot through the desert, but 
it was to my surprise that I saw every day beautiful lakes, with trees all round 
them, and the shadows of the trees upside down and vibrating there. "How 
wonderful it looks and they call this a desert country!" I said to myself. Nearly 
a month I travelled, seeing these wonderful lakes and trees and plants. One day 
I was very thirsty and wanted to have a drink of water, so I started to go to one 
of these clear, beautiful lakes, and as I approached, it vanished. And with a 
flash it came to my brain, "This is the mirage about which I have read all my 
life," and with that came also the idea that throughout the whole of this month, 
every day, I had been seeing the mirage and did not know it. The next morning 
I began my march. There was again the lake, but with it came also the idea that 
it was the mirage and not a true lake. So is it with this universe. We are all 
travelling in this mirage of the world day after day, month after month, year 
after year, not knowing that it is a mirage. One day it will break up, but it will 
come back again; the body has to remain under the power of past Karma, and 
so the mirage will come back. This world will come back upon us so long as 
we are bound by Karma: men, women, animals, plants, our attachments and 
duties, all will come back to us, but not with the same power. Under the 
influence of the new knowledge the strength of Karma will be broken, its 
poison will be lost. It becomes transformed, for along with it there comes the 
idea that we know it now, that the sharp distinction between the reality and the 
mirage has been known. 

This world will not then be the same world as before. There is, however, a 
danger here. We see in every country people taking up this philosophy and 
saying, "I am beyond all virtue and vice; so I am not bound by any moral laws; 
I may do anything I like." You may find many fools in this country at the 
present time, saying, "I am not bound; I am God Himself; let me do anything I 
like." This is not right, although it is true that the soul is beyond all laws, 
physical, mental, or moral. Within law is bondage; beyond law is freedom. It is 
also true that freedom is of the nature of the soul, it is its birthright: that real 
freedom of the soul shines through veils of matter in the form of the apparent 
freedom of man. Every moment of your life you feel that you are free. We 
cannot live, talk, or breathe for a moment without feeling that we are free; but, 
at the same time, a little thought shows us that we are like machines and not 
free. What is true then? Is this idea of freedom a delusion? One party holds that 


the idea of freedom is a delusion; another says that the idea of bondage is a 
delusion. How does this happen? Man is really free, the real man cannot but be 
free. It is when he comes into the world of Maya, into name and form, that he 
becomes bound. Free will is a misnomer. Will can never be free. How can it 
be? It is only when the real man has become bound that his will comes into 
existence, and not before. The will of man is bound, but that which is the 
foundation of that will is eternally free. So, even in the state of bondage which 
we call human life or god-life, on earth or in heaven, there yet remains to us 
that recollection of the freedom which is ours by divine right. And consciously 
or unconsciously we are all struggling towards it. When a man has attained his 
own freedom, how can he be bound by any law? No law in this universe can 
bind him, for this universe itself is his. 

He is the whole universe. Either say he is the whole universe or say that to him 
there is no universe. How can he have then all these little ideas about sex and 
about country? How can he say, I am a man, I am a woman I am a child? Are 
they not lies? He knows that they are. How can he say that these are man's 
rights, and these others are woman's rights? Nobody has rights; nobody 
separately exists. There is neither man nor woman; the soul is sexless, eternally 
pure. It is a lie to say that I am a man or a woman, or to say that I belong to this 
country or that. All the world is my country, the whole universe is mine, 
because I have clothed myself with it as my body. Yet we see that there are 
people in this world who are ready to assert these doctrines, and at the same 
time do things which we should call filthy; and if we ask them why they do so, 
they tell us that it is our delusion and that they can do nothing wrong. What is 
the test by which they are to be judged? The test is here. 

Though evil and good are both conditioned manifestations of the soul, yet evil 
is the most external coating, and good is the nearer coating of the real man, the 
Self. And unless a man cuts through the layer of evil he cannot reach the layer 
of good, and unless he has passed through both the layers of good and evil he 
cannot reach the Self. He who reaches the Self, what remains attached to him? 
A little Karma, a little bit of the momentum of past life, but it is all good 
momentum. Until the bad momentum is entirely worked out and past impurities 
are entirely burnt, it is impossible for any man to see and realise truth. So, what 
is left attached to the man who has reached the Self and seen the truth is the 


remnant of the good impressions of past life, the good momentum. Even if he 
lives in the body and works incessantly, he works only to do good; his lips 
speak only benediction to all; his hands do only good works; his mind can only 
think good thoughts; his presence is a blessing wherever he goes. He is himself 
a living blessing. Such a man will, by his very presence, change even the most 
wicked persons into saints. Even if he does not speak, his very presence will be 
a blessing to mankind. Can such men do any evil; can they do wicked deeds? 
There is, you must remember, all the difference of pole to pole between 
realisation and mere talking. Any fool can talk. Even parrots talk. Talking is 
one thing, and realising is another. Philosophies, and doctrines, and arguments, 
and books, and theories, and churches, and sects, and all these things are good 
in their own way; but when that realisation comes, these things drop away. Eor 
instance, maps are good, but when you see the country itself, and look again at 
the maps, what a great difference you find! So those that have realised truth do 
not require the ratiocinations of logic and all other gymnastics of the intellect to 
make them understand the truth; it is to them the life of their lives, concretised, 
made more than tangible. It is, as the sages of the Vedanta say, "even as a fruit 
in your hand"; you can stand up and say, it is here. So those that have realised 
the truth will stand up and say, "Here is the Self". You may argue with them by 
the year, but they will smile at you; they will regard it all as child's prattle; they 
will let the child prattle on. They have realised the truth and are full. Suppose 
you have seen a country, and another man comes to you and tries to argue with 
you that that country never existed, he may go on arguing indefinitely, but your 
only attitude of mind towards him must be to hold that the man is fit for a 
lunatic asylum. So the man of realisation says, "All this talk in the world about 
its little religions is but prattle; realisation is the soul, the very essence of 
religion." Religion can be realised. Are you ready? Do you want it? You will 
get the realisation if you do, and then you will be truly religious. Until you 
have attained realisation there is no difference between you and atheists. The 
atheists are sincere, but the man who says that he believes in religion and never 
attempts to realise it is not sincere. 

The next question is to know what comes after realisation. Suppose we have 
realised this oneness of the universe, that we are that one Infinite Being, and 
suppose we have realised that this Self is the only Existence and that it is the 
same Self which is manifesting in all these various phenomenal forms, what 


becomes of us after that? Shall we become inactive, get into a corner and sit 
down there and die away? "What good will it do to the world?" That old 
question! In the first place, why should it do good to the world? Is there any 
reason why it should? What right has any one to ask the question, "What good 
will it do to the world?" What is meant by that? A baby likes candies. Suppose 
you are conducting investigations in connection with some subject of electricity 
and the baby asks you, "Does it buy candies?" "No" you answer. "Then what 
good will it do?" says the baby. So men stand up and say, "What good will this 
do to the world; will it give us money?" "No." "Then what good is there in it?" 
That is what men mean by doing good to the world. Yet religious realisation 
does all the good to the world. People are afraid that when they attain to it, 
when they realise that there is but one, the fountains of love will be dried up, 
that everything in life will go away, and that all they love will vanish for them, 
as it were, in this life and in the life to come. People never stop to think that 
those who bestowed the least thought on their own individualities have been 
the greatest workers in the world. Then alone a man loves when he finds that 
the object of his love is not any low, little, mortal thing. Then alone a man 
loves when he finds that the object of his love is not a clod of earth, but it is the 
veritable God Himself. The wife will love the husband the more when she 
thinks that the husband is God Himself. The husband will love the wife the 
more when he knows that the wife is God Himself. That mother will love the 
children more who thinks that the children are God Himself. That man will 
love his greatest enemy who knows that that very enemy is God Himself. That 
man will love a holy man who knows that the holy man is God Himself, and 
that very man will also love the unholiest of men because he knows the 
background of that unholiest of men is even He, the Lord. Such a man becomes 
a world-mover for whom his little self is dead and God stands in its place. The 
whole universe will become transfigured to him. That which is painful and 
miserable will all vanish; struggles will all depart and go. Instead of being a 
prison-house, where we every day struggle and fight and compete for a morsel 
of bread, this universe will then be to us a playground. Beautiful will be this 
universe then! Such a man alone has the right to stand up and say, "How 
beautiful is this world!" He alone has the right to say that it is all good. This 
will be the great good to the world resulting from such realisation, that instead 
of this world going on with all its friction and clashing, if all mankind today 
realise only a bit of that great truth, the aspect of the whole world will be 


changed, and, in place of fighting and quarrelling, there would be a reign of 
peace. This indecent and brutal hurry which forces us to go ahead of every one 
else will then vanish from the world. With it will vanish all struggle, with it 
will vanish all hate, with it will vanish all jealousy, and all evil will vanish 
away for ever. Gods will live then upon this earth. This very earth will then 
become heaven, and what evil can there be when gods are playing with gods, 
when gods are working with gods, and gods are loving gods? That is the great 
utility of divine realisation. Everything that you see in society will be changed 
and transfigured then. No more will you think of man as evil; and that is the 
first great gain. No more will you stand up and sneeringly cast a glance at a 
poor man or woman who has made a mistake. No more, ladies, will you look 
down with contempt upon the poor woman who walks the street in the night, 
because you will see even there God Himself. No more will you think of 
jealousy and punishments. They will all vanish; and love, the great ideal of 
love, will be so powerful that no whip and cord will be necessary to guide 
mankind aright. 

If one millionth part of the men and women who live in this world simply sit 
down and for a few minutes say, "You are all God, O ye men and O ye animals 
and living beings, you are all the manifestations of the one living Deity!" the 
whole world will be changed in half an hour. Instead of throwing tremendous 
bomb-shells of hatred into every corner, instead of projecting currents of 
jealousy and of evil thought, in every country people will think that it is all He. 
He is all that you see and feel. How can you see evil until there is evil in you? 
How can you see the thief, unless he is there, sitting in the heart of your heart? 
How can you see the murderer until you are yourself the murderer? Be good, 
and evil will vanish for you. The whole universe will thus be changed. This is 
the greatest gain to society. This is the great gain to the human organism. These 
thoughts were thought out, worked out amongst individuals in ancient times in 
India. For various reasons, such as the exclusiveness of the teachers and foreign 
conquest, those thoughts were not allowed to spread. Yet they are grand truths; 
and wherever they have been working, man has become divine. My whole life 
has been changed by the touch of one of these divine men, about whom I am 
going to speak to you next Sunday; and the time is coming when these thoughts 
will be cast abroad over the whole world. Instead of living in monasteries, 
instead of being confined to books of philosophy to be studied only by the 


learned, instead of being the exclusive possession of sects and of a few of the 
learned, they will all be sown broadcast over the whole world, so that they may 
become the common property of the saint and the sinner, of men and women 
and children, of the learned and of the ignorant. They will then permeate the 
atmosphere of the world, and the very air that we breathe will say with every 
one of its pulsations, "Thou art That". And the whole universe with its myriads 
of suns and moons, through everything that speaks, with one voice will say, 
"Thou art That". 


» 


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 2 

Practical Vedanta and other lectures 

Practical Vedanta: Part I 

Practical Vedanta: Part II 

Practical Vedanta: Part III 

Practical Vedanta: Part IV 

The Wav to the Realisation of a Universal Religion 

The Ideal of a Universal Religion 

The Open Secret 
The Way to Blessedness 

Yainavalkya and Maitreyi 

Soul, Nature and God 

Cosmology 

A study of the Sankhya philosophy 

Sankhya and Vedanta 

The Goal 


















« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


PRACTICAL VEDANTA 
PARTI 

{Delivered in London, 10th November 1896) 

I have been asked to say something about the practical position of the Vedanta 
philosophy. As I have told you, theory is very good indeed, but how are we to 
carry it into practice? If it be absolutely impracticable, no theory is of any value 
whatever, except as intellectual gymnastics. The Vedanta, therefore, as a 
religion must be intensely practical. We must be able to carry it out in every 
part of our lives. And not only this, the fictitious differentiation between 
religion and the life of the world must vanish, for the Vedanta teaches oneness 
— one life throughout. The ideals of religion must cover the whole field of life, 
they must enter into all our thoughts, and more and more into practice. I will 
enter gradually on the practical side as we proceed. But this series of lectures is 
intended to be a basis, and so we must first apply ourselves to theories and 
understand how they are worked out, proceeding from forest caves to busy 
streets and cities; and one peculiar feature we find is that many of these 
thoughts have been the outcome, not of retirement into forests, but have 
emanated from persons whom we expect to lead the busiest lives — from 
ruling monarchs. 

A. 

Shvetaketu was the son of Aruni, a sage, most probably a recluse. He was 
brought up in the forest, but he went to the city of the Panchalas and appeared 
at the court of the king, Pravahana Jaivali. The king asked him, "Do you know 
how beings depart hence at death?" "No, sir." "Do you know how they return 
hither?" "No, sir." "Do you know the way of the fathers and the way of the 
gods?" "No, sir." Then the king asked other questions. Shvetaketu could not 
answer them. So the king told him that he knew nothing. The boy went back to 
his father, and the father admitted that he himself could not answer these 
questions. It was not that he was unwilling to answer these questions. It was not 
that he was unwilling to teach the boy, but he did not know these things. So he 
went to the king and asked to be taught these secrets. The king said that these 
things had been hitherto known only among kings; the priests never knew 







them. He, however, proceeded to teach him what he desired to know. In 
various Upanishads we find that this Vedanta philosophy is not the outcome of 
meditation in the forests only, but that the very best parts of it were thought out 
and expressed by brains which were busiest in the everyday affairs of life. We 
cannot conceive any man busier than an absolute monarch, a man who is ruling 
over millions of people, and yet, some of these rulers were deep thinkers. 

Everything goes to show that this philosophy must be very practical; and later 
on, when we come to the Bhagavad-Gita — most of you, perhaps, have read it, 
it is the best commentary we have on the Vedanta philosophy — curiously 
enough the scene is laid on the battlefield, where Krishna teaches this 
philosophy to Arjuna; and the doctrine which stands out luminously in every 
page of the Gita is intense activity, but in the midst of it, eternal calmness. This 
is the secret of work, to attain which is the goal of the Vedanta. Inactivity, as 
we understand it in the sense of passivity, certainly cannot be the goal. Were it 
so, then the walls around us would be the most intelligent; they are inactive. 
Clods of earth, stumps of trees, would be the greatest sages in the world; they 
are inactive. Nor does inactivity become activity when it is combined with 
passion. Real activity, which is the goal of Vedanta, is combined with eternal 
calmness, the calmness which cannot be ruffled, the balance of mind which is 
never disturbed, whatever happens. And we all know from our experience in 
life that that is the best attitude for work. 

I have been asked many times how we can work if we do not have the passion 
which we generally feel for work. I also thought in that way years ago, but as I 
am growing older, getting more experience, I find it is not true. The less 
passion there is, the better we work. The calmer we are, the better for us, and 
the more the amount of work we can do. When we let loose our feelings, we 
waste so much energy, shatter our nerves, disturb our minds, and accomplish 
very little work. The energy which ought to have gone out as work is spent as 
mere feeling, which counts for nothing. It is only when the mind is very calm 
and collected that the whole of its energy is spent in doing good work. And if 
you read the lives of the great workers which the world has produced, you will 
find that they were wonderfully calm men. Nothing, as it were, could throw 
them off their balance. That is why the man who becomes angry never does a 
great amount of work, and the man whom nothing can make angry 



accomplishes so much. The man who gives way to anger, or hatred, or any 
other passion, cannot work; he only breaks himself to pieces, and does nothing 
practical. It is the calm, forgiving, equable, well-balanced mind that does the 
greatest amount of work. 

The Vedanta preaches the ideal; and the ideal, as we know, is always far ahead 
of the real, of the practical, as we may call it. There are two tendencies in 
human nature: one to harmonise the ideal with the life, and the other to elevate 
the life to the ideal. It is a great thing to understand this, for the former 
tendency is the temptation of our lives. I think that I can only do a certain class 
of work. Most of it, perhaps, is bad; most of it, perhaps, has a motive power of 
passion behind it, anger, or greed, or selfishness. Now if any man comes to 
preach to me a certain ideal, the first step towards which is to give up 
selfishness, to give up self-enjoyment, I think that is impractical. But when a 
man brings an ideal which can be reconciled with my selfishness, I am glad at 
once and jump at it. That is the ideal for me. As the word "orthodox" has been 
manipulated into various forms, so has been the word "practical". "My doxy is 
orthodoxy; your doxy is heterodoxy." So with practicality. What I think is 
practical, is to me the only practicality in the world. If I am a shopkeeper, I 
think shopkeeping the only practical pursuit in the world. If I am a thief, I think 
stealing is the best means of being practical; others are not practical. You see 
how we all use this word practical for things we like and can do. Therefore I 
will ask you to understand that Vedanta, though it is intensely practical, is 
always so in the sense of the ideal. It does not preach an impossible ideal, 
however high it be, and it is high enough for an ideal. In one word, this ideal is 
that you are divine, "Thou art That". This is the essence of Vedanta; after ah its 
ramifications and intellectual gymnastics, you know the human soul to be pure 
and omniscient, you see that such superstitions as birth and death would be 
entire nonsense when spoken of in connection with the soul. The soul was 
never born and will never die, and ah these ideas that we are going to die and 
are afraid to die are mere superstitions. And all such ideas as that we can do 
this or cannot do that are superstitions. We can do everything. The Vedanta 
teaches men to have faith in themselves first. As certain religions of the world 
say that a man who does not believe in a Personal God outside of himself is an 
atheist, so the Vedanta says, a man who does not believe in himself is an 
atheist. Not believing in the glory of our own soul is what the Vedanta calls 


atheism. To many this is, no doubt, a terrible idea; and most of us think that 
this ideal can never be reached; but the Vedanta insists that it can be realised by 
every one. There is neither man nor woman or child, nor difference of race or 
sex, nor anything that stands as a bar to the realisation of the ideal, because 
Vedanta shows that it is realised already, it is already there. 

All the powers in the universe are already ours. It is we who have put our hands 
before our eyes and cry that it is dark. Know that there is no darkness around 
us. Take the hands away and there is the light which was from the beginning. 
Darkness never existed, weakness never existed. We who are fools cry that we 
are weak; we who are fools cry that we are impure. Thus Vedanta not only 
insists that the ideal is practical, but that it has been so all the time; and this 
Ideal, this Reality, is our own nature. Everything else that you see is false, 
untrue. As soon as you say, "I am a little mortal being," you are saying 
something which is not true, you are giving the lie to yourselves, you are 
hypnotising yourselves into something vile and weak and wretched. 

The Vedanta recognises no sin, it only recognises error. And the greatest error, 
says the Vedanta, is to say that you are weak, that you are a sinner, a miserable 
creature, and that you have no power and you cannot do this and that. Every 
time you think in that way, you, as it were, rivet one more link in the chain that 
binds you down, you add one more layer of hypnotism on to your own soul. 
Therefore, whosoever thinks he is weak is wrong, whosoever thinks he is 
impure is wrong, and is throwing a bad thought into the world. This we must 
always bear in mind that in the Vedanta there is no attempt at reconciling the 
present life — the hypnotised life, this false life which we have assumed — 
with the ideal; but this false life must go, and the real life which is always 
existing must manifest itself, must shine out. No man becomes purer and purer, 
it is a matter of greater manifestation. The veil drops away, and the native 
purity of the soul begins to manifest itself. Everything is ours already — 
infinite purity, freedom, love, and power. 

The Vedanta also says that not only can this be realised in the depths of forests 
or caves, but by men in all possible conditions of life. We have seen that the 
people who discovered these truths were neither living in caves nor forests, nor 
following the ordinary vocations of life, but men who, we have every reason to 




believe, led the busiest of lives, men who had to command armies, to sit on 
thrones, and look to the welfare of millions — and all these, in the days of 
absolute monarchy, and not as in these days when a king is to a great extent a 
mere figurehead. Yet they could find time to think out all these thoughts, to 
realise them, and to teach them to humanity. How much more then should it be 
practical for us whose lives, compared with theirs, are lives of leisure? That we 
cannot realise them is a shame to us, seeing that we are comparatively free all 
the time, having very little to do. My requirements are as nothing compared 
with those of an ancient absolute monarch. My wants are as nothing compared 
with the demands of Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, commanding a 
huge army; and yet he could find time in the midst of the din and turmoil of 
battle to talk the highest philosophy and to carry it into his life also. Surely we 
ought to be able to do as much in this life of ours — comparatively free, easy, 
and comfortable. Most of us here have more time than we think we have, if we 
really want to use it for good. With the amount of freedom we have we can 
attain to two hundred ideals in this life, if we will, but we must not degrade the 
ideal to the actual. One of the most insinuating things comes to us in the shape 
of persons who apologise for our mistakes and teach us how to make special 
excuses for all our foolish wants and foolish desires; and we think that their 
ideal is the only ideal we need have. But it is not so. The Vedanta teaches no 
such thing. The actual should be reconciled to the ideal, the present life should 
be made to coincide with life eternal. 

For you must always remember that the one central ideal of Vedanta is this 
oneness. There are no two in anything, no two lives, nor even two different 
kinds of life for the two worlds. You will find the Vedas speaking of heavens 
and things like that at first; but later on, when they come to the highest ideals of 
their philosophy, they brush away all these things. There is but one life, one 
world, one existence. Everything is that One, the difference is in degree and not 
in kind. The difference between our lives is not in kind. The Vedanta entirely 
denies such ideas as that animals are separate from men, and that they were 
made and created by God to be used for our food. 

Some people have been kind enough to start an antivivisection society. I asked 
a member, "Why do you think, my friend, that it is quite lawful to kill animals 
for food, and not to kill one or two for scientific experiments?" He replied. 



"Vivisection is most horrible, but animals have been given to us for food." 
Oneness includes all animals. If man's life is immortal, so also is the animal's. 
The difference is only in degree and not in kind. The amoeba and I are the 
same, the difference is only in degree; and from the standpoint of the highest 
life, all these differences vanish. A man may see a great deal of difference 
between grass and a little tree, but if you mount very high, the grass and the 
biggest tree will appear much the same. So, from the standpoint of the highest 
ideal, the lowest animal and the highest man are the same. If you believe there 
is a God, the animals and the highest creatures must be the same. A God who is 
partial to his children called men, and cruel to his children called brute beasts, 
is worse than a demon. I would rather die a hundred times than worship such a 
God. My whole life would be a fight with such a God But there is no 
difference, and those who say there is, are irresponsible, heartless people who 
do not know. Here is a case of the word practical used in a wrong sense. I 
myself may not be a very strict vegetarian, but I understand the ideal. When I 
eat meat I know it is wrong. Even if I am bound to eat it under certain 
circumstances, I know it is cruel. I must not drag my ideal down to the actual 
and apologise for my weak conduct in this way. The ideal is not to eat flesh, 
not to injure any being, for all animals are my brothers. If you can think of 
them as your brothers, you have made a little headway towards the brotherhood 
of all souls, not to speak of the brotherhood of man! That is child's play. You 
generally find that this is not very acceptable to many, because it teaches them 
to give up the actual, and go higher up to the ideal. But if you bring out a 
theory which is reconciled with their present conduct, they regard it as entirely 
practical. 

There is this strongly conservative tendency in human nature: we do not like to 
move one step forward. I think of mankind just as I read of persons who 
become frozen in snow; all such, they say, want to go to sleep, and if you try to 
drag them up, they say, "Let me sleep; it is so beautiful to sleep in the snow", 
and they die there in that sleep. So is our nature. That is what we are doing all 
our life, getting frozen from the feet upwards, and yet wanting to sleep. 
Therefore you must struggle towards the ideal, and if a man comes who wants 
to bring that ideal down to your level, and teach a religion that does not carry 
that highest ideal, do not listen to him. To me that is an impracticable religion. 
But if a man teaches a religion which presents the highest ideal, I am ready for 


him. Beware when anyone is trying to apologise for sense vanities and sense 
weaknesses. If anyone wants to preach that way to us, poor, sense-bound clods 
of earth as we have made ourselves by following that teaching, we shall never 
progress. I have seen many of these things, have had some experience of the 
world, and my country is the land where religious sects grow like mushrooms. 
Every year new sects arise. But one thing I have marked, that it is only those 
that never want to reconcile the man of flesh with the man of truth that make 
progress. Wherever there is this false idea of reconciling fleshly vanities with 
the highest ideals, of dragging down God to the level of man, there comes 
decay. Man should not be degraded to worldly slavery, but should be raised up 
to God. 

At the same time, there is another side to the question. We must not look down 
with contempt on others. All of us are going towards the same goal. The 
difference between weakness and strength is one of degree; the difference 
between virtue and vice is one of degree, the difference between heaven and 
hell is one of degree, the difference between life and death is one of degree, all 
differences in this world are of degree, and not of kind, because oneness is the 
secret of everything. All is One, which manifests Itself, either as thought, or 
life, or soul, or body, and the difference is only in degree. As such, we have no 
right to look down with contempt upon those who are not developed exactly in 
the same degree as we are. Condemn none; if you can stretch out a helping 
hand, do so. If you cannot, fold your hands, bless your brothers, and let them 
go their own way. Dragging down and condemning is not the way to work. 
Never is work accomplished in that way. We spend our energies in 
condemning others. Criticism and condemnation is a vain way of spending our 
energies, for in the long run we come to learn that all are seeing the same thing, 
are more or less approaching the same ideal, and that most of our differences 
are merely differences of expression. 

Take the idea of sin. I was telling you just now the Vedantic idea of it, and the 
other idea is that man is a sinner. They are practically the same, only the one 
takes the positive and the other the negative side. One shows to man his 
strength and the other his weakness. There may be weakness, says the Vedanta, 
but never mind, we want to grow. Disease was found out as soon as man was 
born. Everyone knows his disease; it requires no one to tell us what our 


diseases are. But thinking all the time that we are diseased will not cure us — 
medicine is necessary. We may forget anything outside, we may try to become 
hypocrites to the external world, but in our heart of hearts we all know our 
weaknesses. But, says the Vedanta, being reminded of weakness does not help 
much; give strength, and strength does not come by thinking of weakness all 
the time. The remedy for weakness is not brooding over weakness, but thinking 
of strength. Teach men of the strength that is already within them. Instead of 
telling them they are sinners, the Vedanta takes the opposite position, and says, 
"You are pure and perfect, and what you call sin does not belong to you." Sins 
are very low degrees of Self-manifestation; manifest your Self in a high degree. 
That is the one thing to remember; all of us can do that. Never say, "No", never 
say, "I cannot", for you are infinite. Even time and space are as nothing 
compared with your nature. You can do anything and everything, you are 
almighty. 

These are the principles of ethics, but we shall now come down lower and work 
out the details. We shall see how this Vedanta can be carried into our everyday 
life, the city life, the country life, the national life, and the home life of every 
nation. For, if a religion cannot help man wherever he may be, wherever he 
stands, it is not of much use; it will remain only a theory for the chosen few. 
Religion, to help mankind, must be ready and able to help him in whatever 
condition he is, in servitude or in freedom, in the depths of degradation or on 
the heights of purity; everywhere, equally, it should be able to come to his aid. 
The principles of Vedanta, or the ideal of religion, or whatever you may call it, 
will be fulfilled by its capacity for performing this great function. 

The ideal of faith in ourselves is of the greatest help to us. If faith in ourselves 
had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a very large portion 
of the evils and miseries that we have would have vanished. Throughout the 
history of mankind, if any motive power has been more potent than another in 
the lives of all great men and women, it is that of faith in themselves. Born with 
the consciousness that they were to be great, they became great. Let a man go 
down as low as possible; there must come a time when out of sheer desperation 
he will take an upward curve and will learn to have faith in himself. But it is 
better for us that we should know it from the very first. Why should we have all 
these bitter experiences in order to gain faith in ourselves? We can see that all 


the difference between man and man is owing to the existence or non-existence 
of faith in himself. Faith in ourselves will do everything. I have experienced it 
in my own life, and am still doing so; and as I grow older that faith is becoming 
stronger and stronger. He is an atheist who does not believe in himself. The old 
religions said that he was an atheist who did not believe in God. The new 
religion says that he is the atheist who does not believe in himself. But it is not 
selfish faith because the Vedanta, again, is the doctrine of oneness. It means 
faith in all, because you are all. Love for yourselves means love for all, love for 
animals, love for everything, for you are all one. It is the great faith which will 
make the world better. I am sure of that. He is the highest man who can say 
with truth, "I know all about myself." Do you know how much energy, how 
many powers, how many forces are still lurking behind that frame of yours? 
What scientist has known all that is in man? Millions of years have passed 
since man first came here, and yet but one infinitesimal part of his powers has 
been manifested. Therefore, you must not say that you are weak. How do you 
know what possibilities lie behind that degradation on the surface? You know 
but little of that which is within you. For behind you is the ocean of infinite 
power and blessedness. 

A. 

"This Atman is first to be heard of." Hear day and night that you are that Soul. 
Repeat it to yourselves day and night till it enters into your very veins, till it 
tingles in every drop of blood, till it is in your flesh and bone. Let the whole 
body be full of that one ideal, "I am the birthless, the deathless, the blissful, the 
omniscient, the omnipotent, ever-glorious Soul." Think on it day and night; 
think on it till it becomes part and parcel of your life. Meditate upon it, and out 
of that will come work. "Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaketh," 
and out of the fullness of the heart the hand worketh also. Action will come. 

Fill yourselves with the ideal; whatever you do, think well on it. All your 
actions will be magnified, transformed, deified, by the very power of the 
thought. If matter is powerful, thought is omnipotent. Bring this thought to bear 
upon your life, fill yourselves with the thought of your almightiness, your 
majesty, and your glory. Would to God no superstitions had been put into your 
head! Would to God we had not been surrounded from our birth by all these 
superstitious influences and paralysing ideas of our weakness and vileness! 
Would to God that mankind had had an easier path through which to attain to 
the noblest and highest truths! But man had to pass through all this; do not 


make the path more difficult for those who are coming after you. 

These are sometimes terrible doctrines to teach. I know people who get 
frightened at these ideas, but for those who want to be practical, this is the first 
thing to learn. Never tell yourselves or others that you are weak. Do good if 
you can, but do not injure the world. You know in your inmost heart that many 
of your limited ideas, this humbling of yourself and praying and weeping to 
imaginary beings are superstitions. Tell me one case where these prayers have 
been answered. All the answers that came were from your own hearts. You 
know there are no ghosts, but no sooner are you in the dark than you feel a little 
creepy sensation. That is so because in our childhood we have had all these 
fearful ideas put into our heads. But do not teach these things to others through 
fear of society and public opinion, through fear of incurring the hatred of 
friends, or for fear of losing cherished superstitions. Be masters of all these. 
What is there to be taught more in religion than the oneness of the universe and 
faith in one's self? All the works of mankind for thousands of years past have 
been towards this one goal, and mankind is yet working it out. It is your turn 
now and you already know the truth. For it has been taught on all sides. Not 
only philosophy and psychology, but materialistic sciences have declared it. 
Where is the scientific man today who fears to acknowledge the truth of this 
oneness of the universe? Who is there who dares talk of many worlds? All 
these are superstitions. There is only one life and one world, and this one life 
and one world is appearing to us as manifold. This manifoldness is like a 
dream. When you dream, one dream passes away and another comes. You do 
not live in your dreams. The dreams come one after another, scene after scene 
unfolds before you. So it is in this world of ninety per cent misery and ten per 
cent happiness. Perhaps after a while it will appear as ninety per cent 
happiness, and we shall call it heaven, but a time comes to the sage when the 
whole thing vanishes, and this world appears as God Himself, and his own soul 
as God. It is not therefore that there are many worlds, it is not that there are 
many lives. All this manifoldness is the manifestation of that One. That One is 
manifesting Himself as many, as matter, spirit, mind, thought, and everything 
else. It is that One, manifesting Himself as many. Therefore the first step for us 
to take is to teach the truth to ourselves and to others. 

Let the world resound with this ideal, and let superstitions vanish. Tell it to 


men who are weak and persist in telling it. You are the Pure One; awake and 
arise, O mighty one, this sleep does not become you. Awake and arise, it does 
not befit you. Think not that you are weak and miserable. Almighty, arise and 
awake, and manifest your own nature. It is not fitting that you think yourself a 
sinner. It is not fitting that you think yourself weak. Say that to the world, say it 
to yourselves, and see what a practical result comes, see how with an electric 
flash everything is manifested, how everything is changed. Tell that to 
mankind, and show them their power. Then we shall learn how to apply it in 
our daily lives. 

To be able to use what we call Viveka (discrimination), to learn how in every 
moment of our lives, in every one of our actions, to discriminate between what 
is right and wrong, true and false, we shall have to know the test of truth, which 
is purity, oneness. Everything that makes for oneness is truth. Love is truth, and 
hatred is false, because hatred makes for multiplicity. It is hatred that separates 
man from man; therefore it is wrong and false. It is a disintegrating power; it 
separates and destroys. 

Love binds, love makes for that oneness. You become one, the mother with the 
child, families with the city, the whole world becomes one with the animals. 

For love is Existence, God Himself; and all this is the manifestation of that One 
Love, more or less expressed. The difference is only in degree, but it is the 
manifestation of that One Love throughout. Therefore in all our actions we 
have to judge whether it is making for diversity or for oneness. If for diversity 
we have to give it up, but if it 

makes for oneness we are sure it is good. So with our thoughts; we have to 
decide whether they make for disintegration, multiplicity, or for oneness, 
binding soul to soul and bringing one influence to bear. If they do this, we will 
take them up, and if not, we will throw them off as criminal. 

The whole idea of ethics is that it does not depend on anything unknowable, it 
does not teach anything unknown, but in the language of the Upanishad, "The 
God whom you worship as an unknown God, the same I preach unto thee." It is 
through the Self that you know anything. I see the chair; but to see the chair, I 
have first to perceive myself and then the chair. It is in and through the Self 
that the chair is perceived. It is in and through the Self that you are known to 


me, that the whole world is known to me; and therefore to say this Self is 
unknown is sheer nonsense. Take off the Self and the whole universe vanishes. 
In and through the Self all knowledge comes. Therefore it is the best known of 
all. It is yourself, that which you call I. You may wonder how this I of me can 
be the I of you. You may wonder how this limited I can be the unlimited 
Infinite, but it is so. The limited is a mere fiction. The Infinite has been covered 
up, as it were, and a little of It is manifesting as the I. Limitation can never 
come upon the unlimited; it is a fiction. The Self is known, therefore, to every 
one of us — man, woman, or child — and even to animals. Without knowing 
Him we can neither live nor move, nor have our being; without knowing this 
Lord of all, we cannot breathe or live a second. The God of the Vedanta is the 
most known of all and is not the outcome of imagination. 

If this is not preaching a practical God, how else could you teach a practical 
God? Where is there a more practical God than He whom I see before me — a 
God omnipresent, in every being, more real than our senses? For you are He, 
the Omnipresent God Almighty, the Soul of your souls, and if I say you are not, 
I tell an untruth. I know it, whether at all times I realise it or not. He is the 
Oneness, the Unity of all, the Reality of all life and all existence. 

These ideas of the ethics of Vedanta have to be worked out in detail, and, 
therefore, you must have patience. As I have told you, we want to take the 
subject in detail and work it up thoroughly, to see how the ideas grow from 
very low ideals, and how the one great Ideal of oneness has developed and 
become shaped into the universal love; and we ought to study these in order to 
avoid dangers. The world cannot find time to work it up from the lowest steps. 
But what is the use of our standing on higher steps if we cannot give the truth 
to others coming afterwards? Therefore, it is better to study it in all its 
workings; and first, it is absolutely necessary to clear the intellectual portion, 
although we know that intellectuality is almost nothing; for it is the heart that is 
of most importance. It is through the heart that the Lord is seen, and not 
through the intellect. The intellect is only the street-cleaner, cleansing the path 
for us, a secondary worker, the policeman; but the policeman is not a positive 
necessity for the workings of society. He is only to stop disturbances, to check 
wrong-doing, and that is all the work required of the intellect. When you read 
intellectual books, you think when you have mastered them, "Bless the Lord 



that I am out of them", because the intellect is blind and cannot move of itself, 
it has neither hands nor feet. It is feeling that works, that moves with speed 
infinitely superior to that of electricity or anything else. Do you feel? — that is 
the question. If you do, you will see the Lord: It is the feeling that you have 
today that will be intensified, deified, raised to the highest platform, until it 
feels everything, the oneness in everything, till it feels God in itself and in 
others. The intellect can never do that. "Different methods of speaking words, 
different methods of explaining the texts of books, these are for the enjoyment 
of the learned, not for the salvation of the soul" (Vivekachuddmani, 58). 

Those of you who have read Thomas a Kempis know how in every page he 
insists on this, and almost every holy man in the world has insisted on it. 
Intellect is necessary, for without it we fall into crude errors and make all sorts 
of mistakes. Intellect checks these; but beyond that, do not try to build anything 
upon it. It is an inactive, secondary help; the real help is feeling, love. Do you 
feel for others? If you do, you are growing in oneness. If you do not feel for 
others, you may be the most intellectual giant ever born, but you will be 
nothing; you are but dry intellect, and you will remain so. And if you feel, even 
if you cannot read any book and do not know any language, you are in the right 
way. The Lord is yours. 

Do you not know from the history of the world where the power of the 
prophets lay? Where was it? In the intellect? Did any of them write a fine book 
on philosophy, on the most intricate ratiocinations of logic? Not one of them. 
They only spoke a few words. Feel like Christ and you will be a Christ; feel 
like Buddha and you will be a Buddha. It is feeling that is the life, the strength, 
the vitality, without which no amount of intellectual activity can reach God. 
Intellect is like limbs without the power of locomotion. It is only when feeling 
enters and gives them motion that they move and work on others. That is so all 
over the world, and it is a thing which you must always remember. It is one of 
the most practical things in Vedantic morality, for it is the teaching of the 
Vedanta that you are all prophets, arid all must be prophets. The book is not the 
proof of your conduct, but you are the proof of the book. How do you know 
that a book teaches truth? Because you are truth and feel it. That is what the 
Vedanta says. What is the proof of the Christs and Buddhas of the world? That 
you and I feel like them. That is how you and I understand that they were true. 



Our prophet-soul is the proof of their prophet-soul. Your godhead is the proof 
of God Himself. If you are not a prophet, there never has been anything true of 
God. If you are not God, there never was any God, and never will be. This, 
says the Vedanta, is the ideal to follow. Every one of us will have to become a 
prophet, and you are that already. Only know it. Never think there is anything 
impossible for the soul. It is the greatest heresy to think so. If there is sin, this is 
the only sin — to say that you are weak, or others are weak. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


PRACTICAL VEDANTA 
PART II 

{Delivered in London, 12th November 1896) 

I will relate to you a very ancient story from the Chhandogya Upanishad, which 
tells how knowledge came to a boy. The form of the story is very crude, but we 
shall find that it contains a principle. A young boy said to his mother, "I am 
going to study the Vedas. Tell me the name of my father and my caste." The 
mother was not a married woman, and in India the child of a woman who has 
not been married is considered an outcast; he is not recognised by society and 
is not entitled to study the Vedas. So the poor mother said, "My child, I do not 
know your family name; I was in service, and served in different places; I do 
not know who your father is, but my name is Jabala and your name is 
Satyakama." The little child went to a sage and asked to be taken as a student. 
The sage asked him, "What is the name of your father, and what is your caste?" 
The boy repeated to him what he had heard from his mother. The sage at once 
said, "None but a Brahmin could speak such a damaging truth about himself. 
You are a Brahmin and I will teach you. You have not swerved from truth." So 
he kept the boy with him and educated him. 

Now come some of the peculiar methods of education in ancient India. This 
teacher gave Satyakama four hundred lean, weak cows to take care of, and sent 
him to the forest. There he went and lived for some time. The teacher had told 
him to come back when the herd would increase to the number of one 
thousand. After a few years, one day Satyakama heard a big bull in the herd 
saying to him, "We are a thousand now; take us back to your teacher. I will 
teach you a little of Brahman." "Say on, sir," said Satyakama. Then the bull 
said, "The East is a part of the Lord, so is the West, so is the South, so is the 
North. The four cardinal points are the four parts of Brahman. Fire will also 
teach you something of Brahman." Fire was a great symbol in those days, and 
every student had to procure fire and make offerings. So on the following day, 
Satyakama started for his Guru's house, and when in the evening he had 
performed his oblation, and worshipped at the fire, and was sitting near it, he 






heard a voice come from the fire, "O Satyakama." "Speak, Lord," said 
Satyakama. (Perhaps you may remember a very similar story in the Old 
Testament, how Samuel heard a mysterious voice.) "O Satyakama, I am come 
to teach you a little of Brahman. This earth is a portion of that Brahman. The 
sky and the heaven are portions of It. The ocean is a part of that Brahman." 
Then the fire said that a certain bird would also teach him something. 
Satyakama continued his journey and on the next day when he had performed 
his evening sacrifice a swan came to him and said, "I will teach you something 
about Brahman. This fire which you worship, O Satyakama, is a part of that 
Brahman. The sun is a part, the moon is a part, the lightning is a part of that 
Brahman. A bird called Madgu will tell you more about it." The next evening 
that bird came, and a similar voice was heard by Satyakama, "I will tell you 
something about Brahman. Breath is a part of Brahman, sight is a part, hearing 
is a part, the mind is a part." Then the boy arrived at his teacher's place and 
presented himself before him with due reverence. No sooner had the teacher 
seen this disciple than he remarked: "Satyakama, thy face shines like that of a 
knower of Brahman! Who then has taught thee?" "Beings other than men," 
replied Satyakama. "But I wish that you should teach me, sir. For I have heard 
from men like you that knowledge which is learnt from a Guru alone leads to 
the supreme good." Then the sage taught him the same knowledge which he 
had received from the gods. "And nothing was left out, yea, nothing was left 
out." 

Now, apart from the allegories of what the bull, the fire, and the birds taught, 
we see the tendency of the thought and the direction in which it was going in 
those days. The great idea of which we here see the germ is that all these voices 
are inside ourselves. As we understand these truths better, we find that the 
voice is in our own heart, and the student understood that all the time he was 
hearing the truth; but his explanation was not correct. He was interpreting the 
voice as coming from the external world, while all the time, it was within him. 
The second idea that we get is that of making the knowledge of the Brahman 
practical. The world is always seeking the practical possibilities of religion, and 
we find in these stories how it was becoming more and more practical every 
day. The truth was shown through everything with which the students were 
familiar. The fire they were worshipping was Brahman, the earth was a part of 
Brahman, and so on. 


The next story belongs to Upakosala Kamalayana, a disciple of this Satyakama, 
who went to be taught by him and dwelt with him for some time. Now 
Satyakama went away on a journey, and the student became very downhearted; 
and when the teacher's wife came and asked him why he was not eating, the 
boy said, "I am too unhappy to eat." Then a voice came from the fire he was 
worshipping, saying "This life is Brahman, Brahman is the ether, and Brahman 
is happiness. Know Brahman." "I know, sir," the boy replied, "that life is 
Brahman, but that It is ether and happiness I do not know." Then it explained 
that the two words ether and happiness signified one thing in reality, viz. the 
sentient ether (pure intelligence) that resides in the heart. So, it taught him 
Brahman as life and as the ether in the heart. Then the fire taught him, "This 
earth, food, fire, and sun whom you worship, are forms of Brahman. The 
person that is seen in the sun, I am He. He who knows this and meditates on 
Him, all his sins vanish and he has long life and becomes happy. He who lives 
in the cardinal points, the moon, the stars, and the water, I am He. He who lives 
in this life, the ether, the heavens, and the lightning, I am He." Here too we see 
the same idea of practical religion. The things which they were worshipping, 
such as the fire, the sun, the moon, and so forth, and the voice with which they 
were familiar, form the subject of the stories which explain them and give them 
a higher meaning. And this is the real, practical side of Vedanta. It does not 
destroy the world, but it explains it; it does not destroy the person, but explains 
him; it does not destroy the individuality, but explains it by showing the real 
individuality. It does not show that this world is vain and does not exist, but it 
says, "Understand what this world is, so that it may not hurt you." The voice 
did not say to Upakosala that the fire which he was worshipping, or the sun, or 
the moon, or the lightning, or anything else, was all wrong, but it showed him 
that the same spirit which was inside the sun, and moon, and lightning, and the 
fire, and the earth, was in him, so that everything became transformed, as it 
were, in the eyes of Upakosala. The fire which was merely a material fire 
before, in which to make oblations, assumed a new aspect and became the 
Lord. The earth became transformed, life became transformed, the sun, the 
moon, the stars, the lightning, everything became transformed and deified. 
Their real nature was known. The theme of the Vedanta is to see the Lord in 
everything, to see things in their real nature, not as they appear to be. Then 
another lesson is taught in the Upanishads: "He who shines through the eyes is 


Brahman; He is the Beautiful One, He is the Shining One. He shines in all 
these worlds." A certain peculiar light, a commentator says, which comes to the 
pure man, is what is meant by the light in the eyes, and it is said that when a 
man is pure such a light will shine in his eyes, and that light belongs really to 
the Soul within, which is everywhere. It is the same light which shines in the 
planets, in the stars, and suns. 

I will now read to you some other doctrine of these ancient Upanishads, about 
birth and death and so on. Perhaps it will interest you. Shvetaketu went to the 
king of the Panchalas, and the king asked him, "Do you know where people go 
when they die? Do you know how they come back? Do you know why the 
other world does not become full?" The boy replied that he did not know. Then 
he went to his father and asked him the same questions. The father said, "I do 
not know," and he went to the king. The king said that this knowledge was 
never known to the priests, it was only with the kings, and that was the reason 
why kings ruled the world. This man stayed with the king for some time, for 
the king said he would teach him. "The other world, O Gautama, is the fire. 

The sun is its fuel. The rays are the smoke. The day is the flame. The moon is 
the embers. And the stars are the sparks. In this fire the gods pour libation of 
faith and from this libation king Soma is born." So on he goes. "You need not 
make oblation to that little fire: the whole world is that fire, and this oblation, 
this worship, is continually going on. The gods, and the angels, and everybody 
is worshipping it. Man is the greatest symbol of fire, the body of man." Here 
also we see the ideal becoming practical and Brahman is seen in everything. 
The principle that underlies all these stories is that invented symbolism may be 
good and helpful, but already better symbols exist than any we can invent. You 
may invent an image through which to worship God, but a better image already 
exists, the living man. You may build a temple in which to worship God, and 
that may be good, but a better one, a much higher one, already exists, the 
human body. 

You remember that the Vedas have two parts, the ceremonial and the 
knowledge portions. In time ceremonials had multiplied and become so 
intricate that it was almost hopeless to disentangle them, and so in the 
Upanishads we find that the ceremonials are almost done away with, but 
gently, by explaining them. We see that in old times they had these oblations 


and sacrifices, then the philosophers came, and instead of snatching away the 
symbols from the hands of the ignorant, instead of taking the negative position, 
which we unfortunately find so general in modern reforms, they gave them 
something to take their place. "Here is the symbol of fire," they said. "Very 
good! But here is another symbol, the earth. What a grand, great symbol! Here 
is this little temple, but the whole universe is a temple; a man can worship 
anywhere. There are the peculiar figures that men draw on the earth, and there 
are the altars, but here is the greatest of altars, the living, conscious human 
body, and to worship at this altar is far higher than the worship of any dead 
symbols." 

We now come to a peculiar doctrine. I do not understand much of it myself. If 
you can make something out of it, I will read it to you. When a man dies, who 
has by meditation purified himself and got knowledge, he first goes to light, 
then from light to day, from day to the light half of the moon, from that to the 
six months when the sun goes to the north, from that to the year, from the year 
to the sun, from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning, and when 
he comes to the sphere of lightning, he meets a person who is not human, and 
that person leads him to (the conditioned) Brahman. This is the way of the 
gods. When sages and wise persons die, they go that way and they do not 
return. What is meant by this month and year, and all these things, no one 
understands clearly. Each one gives his own meaning, and some say it is all 
nonsense. What is meant by going to the world of the moon and of the sun, and 
this person who comes to help the soul after it. has reached the sphere of 
lightning, no one knows. There is an idea among the Hindus that the moon is a 
place where life exists, and we shall see how life has come from there. Those 
that have not attained to knowledge, but have done good work in this life, first 
go, when they die, through smoke, then to night, then to the dark fifteen days, 
then to the six months when the sun goes to the south, and from that they go to 
the region of their forefathers, then to ether, then to the region of the moon, and 
there become the food of the gods, and later, are born as gods and live there so 
long as their good works will permit. And when the effect of the good work has 
been finished, they come back to earth by the same route. They first become 
ether, and then air, and then smoke, and then mist, then cloud, and then fall 
upon the earth as raindrops; then they get into food, which is eaten up by 
human beings, and finally become their children. Those whose works have 


been very good take birth in good families, and those whose works have been 
bad take bad births, even in animal bodies. Animals are continually coming to 
and going from this earth. That is why the earth is neither full nor empty. 

Several ideas we can get also from this, and later on, perhaps, we shall be able 
to understand it better, and we can speculate a little upon what it means. The 
last part which deals with how those who have been in heaven return, is clearer, 
perhaps, than the first part; but the whole idea seems to be this that there is no 
permanent heaven without realising God. Now some people who have not 
realised God, but have done good work in this world, with the view of enjoying 
the results, go, when they die, through this and that place, until they reach 
heaven, and there they are born in the same way as we are here, as children of 
the gods, and they live there as long as their good works will permit. Out of this 
comes one basic idea of the Vedanta that everything which has name and form 
is transient. This earth is transient, because it has name and form, and so the 
heavens must be transient, because there also name and form remain. A heaven 
which is eternal will be contradictory in terms, because everything that has 
name and form must begin in time, exist in time, and end in time. These are 
settled doctrines of the Vedanta, and as such the heavens are given up. 

We have seen in the Samhita that the idea of heaven was that it was eternal, 
much the same as is prevalent among Mohammedans and Christians. The 
Mohammedans concretise it a little more. They say it is a place where there are 
gardens, beneath which rivers run. In the desert of Arabia water is very 
desirable, so the Mohammedan always conceives of his heaven as containing 
much water. I was born in a country where there are six months of rain every 
year. I should think of heaven, I suppose, as a dry place, and so also would the 
English people. These heavens in the Samhita are eternal, and the departed 
have beautiful bodies and live with their forefathers, and are happy ever 
afterwards. There they meet with their parents, children, and other relatives, 
and lead very much the same sort of life as here, only much happier. All the 
difficulties and obstructions to happiness in this life have vanished, and only its 
good parts and enjoyments remain. But however comfortable mankind may 
consider this state of things, truth is one thing and comfort is another. There are 
cases where truth is not comfortable until we reach its climax. Human nature is 
very conservative It does something, and having once done that, finds it hard to 


get out of it. The mind will not receive new thoughts, because they bring 
discomfort. 

In the Upanishads, we see a tremendous departure made. It is declared that 
these heavens in which men live with the ancestors after death cannot be 
permanent, seeing that everything which has name and form must die. If there 
are heavens with forms, these heavens must vanish in course of time; they may 
last millions of years, but there must come a time when they will have to go. 
With this idea came another that these souls must come back to earth, and that 
heavens are places where they enjoy the results of their good works, and after 
these effects are finished they come back into this earth life again. One thing is 
clear from this that mankind had a perception of the philosophy of causation 
even at the early time. Later on we shall see how our philosophers bring that 
out in the language of philosophy and logic, but here it is almost in the 
language of children. One thing you may remark in reading these books that it 
is all internal perception. If you ask me if this can be practical, my answer is, it 
has been practical first, and philosophical next. You can see that first these 
things have been perceived and realised and then written. This world spoke to 
the early thinkers. Birds spoke to them, animals spoke to them, the sun and the 
moon spoke to them; and little by little they realised things, and got into the 
heart of nature. Not by cogitation not by the force of logic, not by picking the 
brains of others and making a big book, as is the fashion in modern times, not 
even as I do, by taking up one of their writings and making a long lecture, but 
by patient investigation and discovery they found out the truth. Its essential 
method was practice, and so it must be always. Religion is ever a practical 
science, and there never was nor will be any theological religion. It is practice 
first, and knowledge afterwards. The idea that souls come back is already there. 
Those persons who do good work with the idea of a result, get it, but the result 
is not permanent. There we get the idea of causation very beautifully put 
forward, that the effect is only commensurate with the cause. As the cause is, 
so the effect will be. The cause being finite, the effect must be finite. If the 
cause is eternal the effect can be eternal, but all these causes, doing good work, 
and all other things, are only finite causes, and as such cannot produce infinite 
result. 


We now come to the other side of the question. As there cannot be an eternal 


heaven, on the same grounds, there cannot be an eternal hell. Suppose I am a 
very wicked man, doing evil every minute of my life. Still, my whole life here, 
compared with my eternal life, is nothing. If there be an eternal punishment, it 
will mean that there is an infinite effect produced by a finite cause, which 
cannot be. If I do good all my life, I cannot have an infinite heaven; it would be 
making the same mistake. But there is a third course which applies to those 
who have known the Truth, to those who have realised It. This is the only way 
to get beyond this veil of Maya — to realise what Truth is; and the Upanishads 
indicate what is meant by realising the Truth. 

It means recognising neither good nor bad, but knowing all as coming from the 
Self; Self is in everything. It means denying the universe; shutting your eyes to 
it; seeing the Lord in hell as well as in heaven; seeing the Lord in death as well 
as in life. This is the line of thought in the passage I have read to you; the earth 
is a symbol of the Lord, the sky is the Lord, the place we fill is the Lord, 
everything is Brahman. And this is to be seen, realised, not simply talked or 
thought about. We can see as its logical consequence that when the soul has 
realised that everything is full of the Lord, of Brahman, it will not care whether 
it goes to heaven, or hell, or anywhere else; whether it be born again on this 
earth or in heaven. These things have ceased to have any meaning to that soul, 
because every place is the same, every place is the temple of the Lord, every 
place has become holy and the presence of the Lord is all that it sees in heaven, 
or hell, or anywhere else. Neither good nor bad, neither life nor death — only 
the one infinite Brahman exists. 

According to the Vedanta, when a man has arrived at that perception, he has 
become free, and he is the only man who is fit to live in this world. Others are 
not. The man who sees evil, how can he live in this world? His life is a mass of 
misery. The man who sees dangers, his life is a misery; the man who sees 
death, his life is a misery. That man alone can live in this world, he alone can 
say, "I enjoy this life, and I am happy in this life", who has seen the Truth, and 
the Truth in everything. By the by, I may tell you that the idea of hell does not 
occur in the Vedas anywhere. It comes with the Puranas much later. The worst 
punishment according to the Vedas is coming back to earth, having another 
chance in this world. From the very first we see the idea is taking the 
impersonal turn. The ideas of punishment and reward are very material, and 




they are only consonant with the idea of a human God, who loves one and hates 
another, just as we do. Punishment and reward are only admissible with the 
existence of such a God. They had such a God in the Samhita, and there we 
find the idea of fear entering, but as soon as we come to the Upanishads, the 
idea of fear vanishes, and the impersonal idea takes its place. It is naturally the 
hardest thing for man to understand, this impersonal idea, for he is always 
clinging on to the person. Even people who are thought to be great thinkers get 
disgusted at the idea of the Impersonal God. But to me it seems so absurd to 
think of God as an embodied man. Which is the higher idea, a living God, or a 
dead God? A God whom nobody sees, nobody knows, or a God Known? 

The Impersonal God is a living God, a principle. The difference between 
personal and impersonal is this, that the personal is only a man, and the 
impersonal idea is that He is the angel, the man, the animal, and yet something 
more which we cannot see, because impersonality includes all personalities, is 
the sum total of everything in the universe, and infinitely more besides. "As the 
one fire coming into the world is manifesting itself in so many forms, and yet is 
infinitely more besides," so is the Impersonal. 

We want to worship a living God. I have seen nothing but God all my life, nor 
have you. To see this chair you first see God, and then the chair in and through 
Him He is everywhere saying, "I am". The moment you feel "I am", you are 
conscious of Existence. Where shall we go to find God if we cannot see Him in 
our own hearts and in every living being? "Thou art the man. Thou art the 
woman. Thou art the girl, and Thou art the boy. Thou art the old man tottering 
with a stick. Thou art the young man walking in the pride of his strength." 

Thou art all that exists, a wonderful living God who is the only fact in the 
universe. This seems to many to be a terrible contradiction to the traditional 
God who lives behind a veil somewhere and whom nobody ever sees. The 
priests only give us an assurance that if we follow them, listen to their 
admonitions, and walk in the way they mark out for us — then when we die, 
they will give us a passport to enable us to see the face of God! What are all 
these heaven ideas but simply modifications of this nonsensical priestcraft? 

Of course the impersonal idea is very destructive, it takes away all trade from 
the priests, churches, and temples. In India there is a famine now, but there are 


temples in each one of which there are jewels worth a king's ransom! If the 
priests taught this Impersonal idea to the people, their occupation would be 
gone. Yet we have to teach it unselfishly, without priestcraft. You are God and 
so am I; who obeys whom? Who worships whom? You are the highest temple 
of God; I would rather worship you than any temple, image, or Bible. Why are 
some people so contradictory in their thought? They are like fish slipping 
through our fingers. They say they are hard-headed practical men. Very good. 
But what is more practical than worshipping here, worshipping you? I see you, 
feel you, and I know you are God. The Mohammedan says, there is no God but 
Allah. The Vedanta says, there is nothing that is not God. It may frighten many 
of you, but you will understand it by degrees. The living God is within you, and 
yet you are building churches and temples and believing all sorts of imaginary 
nonsense. The only God to worship is the human soul in the human body. Of 
course all animals are temples too, but man is the highest, the Taj Mahal of 
temples. If I cannot worship in that, no other temple will be of any advantage. 
The moment I have realised God sitting in the temple of every human body, the 
moment I stand in reverence before every human being and see God in him — 
that moment I am free from bondage, everything that binds vanishes, and I am 
free. 

This is the most practical of all worship. It has nothing to do with theorising 
and speculation. Yet it frightens many. They say it is not right. They go on 
theorising about old ideals told them by their grandfathers, that a God 
somewhere in heaven had told some one that he was God. Since that time we 
have only theories. This is practicality according to them, and our ideas are 
impractical! No doubt, the Vedanta says that each one must have his own path, 
but the path is not the goal. The worship of a God in heaven and all these things 
are not bad, but they are only steps towards the Truth and not the Truth itself. 
They are good and beautiful, and some wonderful ideas are there, but the 
Vedanta says at every point, "My friend. Him whom you are worshipping as 
unknown, I worship as thee. He whom you are worshipping as unknown and 
are seeking for, throughout the universe, has been with you all the time. You 
are living through Him, and He is the Eternal Witness of the universe" "He 
whom all the Vedas worship, nay, more. He who is always present in the 
eternal T. He existing, the whole universe exists. He is the light and life of the 
universe. If the T were not in you, you would not see the sun, everything would 


be a dark mass. He shining, you see the world." 

One question is generally asked, and it is this that this may lead to a 
tremendous amount of difficulty. Everyone of us will think, "I am God, and 
whatever I do or think must be good, for God can do no evil." In the first place, 
even taking this danger of misinterpretation for granted, can it be proved that 
on the other side the same danger does not exist? They have been worshipping 
a God in heaven separate from them, and of whom they are much afraid. They 
have been born shaking with fear, and all their life they will go on shaking. Has 
the world been made much better by this? Those who have understood and 
worshipped a Personal God, and those who have understood and worshipped an 
Impersonal God, on which side have been the great workers of the world — 
gigantic workers, gigantic moral powers? Certainly on the Impersonal. How 
can you expect morality to be developed through fear? It can never be. "Where 
one sees another, where one hears another, that is Maya. When one does not 
see another, when one does not hear another, when everything has become the 
Atman, who sees whom, who perceives whom?" It is all He, and all I, at the 
same time. The soul has become pure. Then, and then alone we understand 
what love is. Love cannot come through fear, its basis is freedom. When we 
really begin to love the world, then we understand what is meant by 
brotherhood or mankind, and not before. 

So, it is not right to say that the Impersonal idea will lead to a tremendous 
amount of evil in the world, as if the other doctrine never lent itself to works of 
evil, as if it did not lead to sectarianism deluging the world with blood and 
causing men to tear each other to pieces. "My God is the greatest God, let us 
decide it by a free fight." That is the outcome of dualism all over the world. 
Come out into the broad open light of day, come out from the little narrow 
paths, for how can the infinite soul rest content to live and die in small ruts? 
Come out into the universe of Light. Everything in the universe is yours, 
stretch out your arms and embrace it with love. If you ever felt you wanted to 
do that, you have felt God. 

You remember that passage in the sermon of Buddha, how he sent a thought of 
love towards the south, the north, the east, and the west, above and below, until 
the whole universe was filled with this lose, so grand, great, and infinite. When 



you have that feeling, you have true personality. The whole universe is one 
person; let go the little things. Give up the small for the Infinite, give up small 
enjoyments for infinite bliss. It is all yours, for the Impersonal includes the 
Personal. So God is Personal and Impersonal at the same time. And Man, the 
Infinite, Impersonal Man, is manifesting Himself as person. We the infinite 
have limited ourselves, as it were, into small parts. The Vedanta says that 
Infinity is our true nature; it will never vanish, it will abide for ever. But we are 
limiting ourselves by our Karma, which like a chain round our necks has 
dragged us into this limitation. Break that chain and be free. Trample law under 
your feet. There is no law in human nature, there is no destiny, no fate. How 
can there be law in infinity? Freedom is its watchword. Freedom is its nature, 
its birthright. Be free, and then have any number of personalities you like. Then 
we will play like the actor who comes upon the stage and plays the part of a 
beggar. Contrast him with the actual beggar walking in the streets. The scene 
is, perhaps, the same in both cases, the words are, perhaps, the same, but yet 
what difference! The one enjoys his beggary while the other is suffering misery 
from it. And what makes this difference? The one is free and the other is 
bound. The actor knows his beggary is not true, but that he has assumed it for 
play, while the real beggar thinks that it is his too familiar state and that he has 
to bear it whether he wills it or not. This is the law. So long as we have no 
knowledge of our real nature, we are beggars, jostled about by every force in 
nature; and made slaves of by everything in nature; we cry all over the world 
for help, but help never comes to us; we cry to imaginary beings, and yet it 
never comes. But still we hope help will come, and thus in weeping, wailing, 
and hoping, one life is passed, and the same play goes on and on. 

Be free; hope for nothing from anyone. I am sure if you look back upon your 
lives you will find that you were always vainly trying to get help from others 
which never came. All the help that has come was from within yourselves. You 
only had the fruits of what you yourselves worked for, and yet you were 
strangely hoping all the time for help. A rich man's parlour is always full; but if 
you notice, you do not find the same people there. The visitors are always 
hoping that they will get something from those wealthy men, but they never do. 
So are our lives spent in hoping, hoping, hoping, which never comes to an end. 
Give up hope, says the Vedanta. Why should you hope? You have everything, 
nay, you are everything. What are you hoping for? If a king goes mad, and runs 


about trying to find the king of his country, he will never find him, because he 
is the king himself. He may go through every village and city in his own 
country, seeking in every house, weeping and wailing, but he will never find 
him, because he is the king himself. It is better that we know we are God and 
give up this fool's search after Him; and knowing that we are God we become 
happy and contented. Give up all these mad pursuits, and then play your part in 
the universe, as an actor on the stage. 

The whole vision is changed, and instead of an eternal prison this world has 
become a playground; instead of a land of competition it is a land of bliss, 
where there is perpetual spring, flowers bloom and butterflies flit about. This 
very world becomes heaven, which formerly was hell. To the eyes of the bound 
it is a tremendous place of torment, but to the eyes of the free it is quite 
otherwise. This one life is the universal life, heavens and all those places are 
here. All the gods are here, the prototypes of man. The gods did not create man 
after their type, but man created gods. And here are the prototypes, here is 
Indra, here is Varuna, and all the gods of the universe. We have been projecting 
our little doubles, and we are the originals of these gods, we are the real, the 
only gods to be worshipped. This is the view of the Vedanta, and this its 
practicality. When we have become free, we need not go mad and throw up 
society and rush off to die in the forest or the cave; we shall remain where we 
were, only we shall understand the whole thing. The same phenomena will 
remain, but with a new meaning. We do not know the world yet; it is only 
through freedom that we see what it is, and understand its nature. We shall see 
then that this so-called law, or fate, or destiny occupied only an infinitesimal 
part of our nature. It was only one side, but on the other side there was freedom 
all the time. We did not know this, and that is why we have been trying to save 
ourselves from evil by hiding our faces in the ground, like the hunted hare. 
Through delusion we have been trying to forget our nature, and yet we could 
not; it was always calling upon us, and all our search after God or gods, or 
external freedom, was a search after our real nature. We mistook the voice. We 
thought it was from the fire, or from a god or the sun, or moon, or stars, but at 
last we have found that it was from within ourselves. Within ourselves is this 
eternal voice speaking of eternal freedom; its music is eternally going on. Part 
of this music of the Soul has become the earth, the law, this universe, but it was 
always ours and always will be. In one word, the ideal of Vedanta is to know 


man as he really is, and this is its message, that if you cannot worship your 
brother man, the manifested God, how can you worship a God who is 
unmanifested? 

Do you not remember what the Bible says, "If you cannot love your brother 
whom you have seen, how can you love God whom you have not seen?" If you 
cannot see God in the human face, how can you see him in the clouds, or in 
images made of dull, dead matter, or in mere fictitious stories of our brain? I 
shall call you religious from the day you begin to see God in men and women, 
and then you will understand what is meant by turning the left cheek to the man 
who strikes you on the right. When you see man as God, everything, even the 
tiger, will be welcome. Whatever comes to you is but the Lord, the Eternal, the 
Blessed One, appearing to us in various forms, as our father, and mother, and 
friend, and child — they are our own soul playing with us. 

As our human relationships can thus be made divine, so our relationship with 
God may take any of these forms and we can look upon Him as our father, or 
mother, or friend, or beloved. Calling God Mother is a higher ideal than calling 
Him Father; and to call Him Friend is still higher; but the highest is to regard 
Him as the Beloved. The highest point of all is to see no difference between 
lover and beloved. You may remember, perhaps, the old Persian story, of how 
a lover came and knocked at the door of the beloved and was asked, "Who are 
you?" He answered, "It is I", and there was no response. A second time he 
came, and exclaimed, "I am here", but the door was not opened. The third time 
he came, and the voice asked from inside, "Who is there?" He replied, "I am 
thyself, my beloved", and the door opened. So is the relation between God and 
ourselves. He is in everything. He is everything. Every man and woman is the 
palpable, blissful, living God. Who says God is unknown? Who says He is to 
be searched after? We have found God eternally. We have been living in Him 
eternally; everywhere He is eternally known, eternally worshipped. 

Then comes another idea, that other forms of worship are not errors. This is one 
of the great points to be remembered, that those who worship God through 
ceremonials and forms, however crude we may think them to be, are not in 
error. It is the journey from truth to truth, from lower truth to higher truth. 
Darkness is less light; evil is less good; impurity is less purity. It must always 



be borne in mind that we should see others with eyes of love, with sympathy, 
knowing that they are going along the same path that we have trodden. If you 
are free, you must know that all will be so sooner or later, and if you are free, 
how can you see the impermanent? If you are really pure, how do you see the 
impure? For what is within, is without. We cannot see impurity without having 
it inside ourselves. This is one of the practical sides of Vedanta, and I hope that 
we shall all try to carry it into our lives. Our whole life here is to carry this into 
practice, but the one great point we gain is that we shall work with satisfaction 
and contentment, instead of with discontent and dissatisfaction, for we know 
that Truth is within us, we have It as our birthright, and we have only to 
manifest It, and make It tangible. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


PRACTICAL VEDANTA 
PART III 

{Delivered in London, 17th November 1896) 

In the ChhMogya Upanishad we read that a sage called Narada came to another 
called Sanatkumara, and asked him various questions, of which one was, if 
religion was the cause of things as they are. And Sanatkumara leads him, as it 
were, step by step, telling him that there is something higher than this earth, 

A. 

and something higher than that, and so on, till he comes to Akasha, ether. Ether 
is higher than light, because in the ether are the sun and the moon, lightning 
and the stars; in ether we live, and in ether we die. Then the question arises, if 
there is anything higher than that, and Sanatkumara tells him of Prana. This 
Prana, according to the Vedanta, is the principle of life. It is like ether, an 
omnipresent principle; and all motion, either in the body or anywhere else, is 
the work of this Prana. It is greater than Akasha, and through it everything 
lives. Prana is in the mother, in the father, in the sister, in the teacher. Prana is 
the knower. 

I will read another passage, where Shvetaketu asks his father about the Truth, 
and the father teaches him different things, and concludes by saying, "That 
which is the fine cause in all these things, of It are all these things made. That 
is the All, that is Truth, thou art That, O Shvetaketu." And then he gives 
various examples. "As a bee, O Shvetaketu, gathers honey from different 
flowers, and as the different honeys do not know that they are from various 
trees, and from various flowers, so all of us, having come to that Existence, 
know not that we have done so. Now, that which is that subtle essence, in It all 
that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self and thou, O Shvetaketu, are 
That." He gives another example of the rivers running down to the ocean. "As 
the rivers, when they are in the ocean, do not know that they have been various 
rivers, even so when we come out of that Existence, we do not know that we 
are That. O Shvetaketu, thou art That." So on he goes with his teachings. 

Now there are two principles of knowledge. The one principle is that we know 






by referring the particular to the general, and the general to the universal; and 
the second is that anything of which the explanation is sought is to be explained 
so far as possible from its own nature. Taking up the first principle, we see that 
all our knowledge really consists of classifications, going higher and higher. 
When something happens singly, we are, as it were, dissatisfied. When it can 
be shown that the same thing happens again and again, we are satisfied and call 
it law. When we find that one apple falls, we are dissatisfied; but when we find 
that all apples fall, we call it the law of gravitation and are satisfied. The fact is 
that from the particular we deduce the general. 

When we want to study religion, we should apply this scientific process. The 
same principle also holds good here, and as a fact we find that that has been the 
method all through. In reading these books from which I have been translating 
to you, the earliest idea that I can trace is this principle of going from the 
particular to the general. We see how the "bright ones" became merged into 
one principle; and likewise in the ideas of the cosmos we find the ancient 
thinkers going higher and higher — from the fine elements they go to finer and 
more embracing elements, and from these particulars they come to one 
omnipresent ether, and from that even they go to an all embracing force, or 
Prana; and through all this runs the principle, that one is not separate from the 
others. It is the very ether that exists in the higher form of Prana, or the higher 
form of Prana concretes, so to say, and becomes ether; and that ether becomes 
still grosser, and so on. 

The generalization of the Personal God is another case in point. We have seen 
how this generalization was reached, and was called the sum total of all 
consciousness. But a difficulty arises — it is an incomplete generalization. We 
take up only one side of the facts of nature, the fact of consciousness, and upon 
that we generalise, but the other side is left out. So, in the first place it is a 
defective generalization. There is another insufficiency, and that relates to the 
second principle. Everything should be explained from its own nature. There 
may have been people who thought that every apple that fell to the ground was 
dragged down by a ghost, but the explanation is the law of gravitation; and 
although we know it is not a perfect explanation, yet it is much better than the 
other, because it is derived from the nature of the thing itself, while the other 
posits an extraneous cause. So throughout the whole range of our knowledge; 



the explanation which is based upon the nature of the thing itself is a scientific 
explanation, and an explanation which brings in an outside agent is 
unscientific. 

So the explanation of a Personal God as the creator of the universe has to stand 
that test. If that God is outside of nature, having nothing to do with nature, and 
this nature is the outcome of the command of that God and produced from 
nothing, it is a very unscientific theory, and this has been the weak point of 
every Theistic religion throughout the ages. These two defects we find in what 
is generally called the theory of monotheism, the theory of a Personal God, 
with all the qualities of a human being multiplied very much, who, by His will, 
created this universe out of nothing and yet is separate from it. This leads us 
into two difficulties. 

As we have seen, it is not a sufficient generalization, and secondly, it is not an 
explanation of nature from nature. It holds that the effect is not the cause, that 
the cause is entirely separate from the effect. Yet all human knowledge shows 
that the effect is but the cause in another form. To this idea the discoveries of 
modern science are tending every day, and the latest theory that has been 
accepted on all sides is the theory of evolution, the principle of which is that 
the effect is but the cause in another form, a readjustment of the cause, and the 
cause takes the form of the effect. The theory of creation out of nothing would 
be laughed at by modern scientists. 

Now, can religion stand these tests? If there be any religious theories which can 
stand these two tests, they will be acceptable to the modem mind, to the 
thinking mind. Any other theory which we ask the modern man to believe, on 
the authority of priests, or churches, or books, he is unable to accept, and the 
result is a hideous mass of unbelief. Even in those in whom there is an external 
display of belief, in their hearts there is a tremendous amount of unbelief. The 
rest shrink away from religion, as it were, give it up, regarding it as priestcraft 
only. 

Religion has been reduced to a sort of national form. It is one of our very best 
social remnants; let it remain. But the real necessity which the grandfather of 
the modern man felt for it is gone; he no longer finds it satisfactory to his 


reason. The idea of such a Personal God, and such a creation, the idea which is 
generally known as monotheism in every religion, cannot hold its own any 
longer. In India it could not hold its own because of the Buddhists, and that was 
the very point where they gained their victory in ancient times. They showed 
that if we allow that nature is possessed of infinite power, and that nature can 
work out all its wants, it is simply unnecessary to insist that there is something 
besides nature. Even the soul is unnecessary. 

The discussion about substance and qualities is very old, and you will 
sometimes find that the old superstition lives even at the present day. Most of 
you have read how, during the Middle Ages, and, I am sorry to say, even much 
later, this was one of the subjects of discussion, whether qualities adhered to 
substance, whether length, breadth, and thickness adhered to the substance 
which we call dead matter, whether, the substance remaining, the qualities are 
there or not. To this our Buddhist says, "You have no ground for maintaining 
the existence of such a substance; the qualities are all that exist; you do not see 
beyond them." This is just the position of most of our modern agnostics. For it 
is this fight of the substance and qualities that, on a higher plane, takes the form 
of the fight between noumenon and phenomenon. There is the phenomenal 
world, the universe of continuous change, and there is something behind which 
does not change; and this duality of existence, noumenon and phenomenon, 
some hold, is true, and others with better reason claim that you have no right to 
admit the two, for what we see, feel, and think is only the phenomenon. You 
have no right to assert there is anything beyond phenomenon; and there is no 
answer to this. The only answer we get is from the monistic theory of the 
Vedanta. It is true that only one exists, and that one is either phenomenon or 
noumenon. It is not true that there are two — something changing, and, in and 
through that, something which does not change; but it is the one and the same 
thing which appears as changing, and which is in reality unchangeable. We 
have come to think of the body, and mind, and soul as many, but really there is 
only one; and that one is appearing in all these various forms. Take the well- 
known illustration of the monists, the rope appearing as the snake. Some 
people, in the dark or through some other cause, mistake the rope for the snake, 
but when knowledge comes, the snake vanishes and it is found to be a rope. By 
this illustration we see that when the snake exists in the mind, the rope has 
vanished, and when the rope exists, the snake has gone. When we see 



phenomenon, and phenomenon only, around us, the noumenon has vanished, 
but when we see the noumenon, the unchangeable, it naturally follows that the 
phenomenon has vanished. Now, we understand better the position of both the 
realist and the idealist. The realist sees the phenomenon only, and the idealist 
looks to the noumenon. For the idealist, the really genuine idealist, who has 
truly arrived at the power of perception, whereby he can get away from all 
ideas of change, for him the changeful universe has vanished, and he has the 
right to say it is all delusion, there is no change. The realist at the same time 
looks at the changeful. For him the unchangeable has vanished, and he has a 
right to say this is all real. 

What is the outcome of this philosophy? It is that the idea of Personal God is 
not sufficient. We have to get to something higher, to the Impersonal idea. It is 
the only logical step that we can take. Not that the personal idea would be 
destroyed by that, not that we supply proof that the Personal God does not 
exist, but we must go to the Impersonal for the explanation of the personal, for 
the Impersonal is a much higher generalization than the personal. The 
Impersonal only can be Infinite, the personal is limited. Thus we preserve the 
personal and do not destroy it. Often the doubt comes to us that if we arrive at 
the idea of the Impersonal God, the personal will be destroyed, if we arrive at 
the idea of the Impersonal man, the personal will be lost. But the Vedantic idea 
is not the destruction of the individual, but its real preservation. We cannot 
prove the individual by any other means but by referring to the universal, by 
proving that this individual is really the universal. If we think of the individual 
as separate from everything else in the universe, it cannot stand a minute. Such 
a thing never existed. 

Secondly, by the application of the second principle, that the explanation of 
everything must come out of the nature of the thing, we are led to a still bolder 
idea, and one more difficult to understand. It is nothing less than this, that the 
Impersonal Being, our highest generalization, is in ourselves, and we are That. 
"O Shvetaketu, thou art That." You are that Impersonal Being; that God for 
whom you have been searching all over the universe is all the time yourself — 
yourself not in the personal sense but in the Impersonal. The man we know 
now, the manifested, is personalised, but the reality of this is the Impersonal. 
To understand the personal we have to refer it to the Impersonal, the particular 



must be referred to the general, and that Impersonal is the Truth, the Self of 
man. 

There will be various questions in connection with this, and I shall try to 
answer them as we go on. Many difficulties will arise, but first let us clearly 
understand the position of monism. As manifested beings we appear to be 
separate, but our reality is one, and the less we think of ourselves as separate 
from that One, the better for us. The more we think of ourselves as separate 
from the Whole, the more miserable we become. From this monistic principle 
we get at the basis of ethics, and I venture to say that we cannot get any ethics 
from anywhere else. We know that the oldest idea of ethics was the will of 
some particular being or beings, but few are ready to accept that now, because 
it would be only a partial generalization. The Hindus say we must not do this or 
that because the Vedas say so, but the Christian is not going to obey the 
authority of the Vedas. The Christian says you must do this and not do that 
because the Bible says so. That will not be binding on those who do not believe 
in the Bible. But we must have a theory which is large enough to take in all 
these various grounds. Just as there are millions of people who are ready to 
believe in a Personal Creator, there have also been thousands of the brightest 
minds in this world who felt that such ideas were not sufficient for them, and 
wanted something higher, and wherever religion was not broad enough to 
include all these minds, the result was that the brightest minds in society were 
always outside of religion; and never was this so marked as at the present time, 
especially in Europe. 

To include these minds, therefore, religion must become broad enough. 
Everything it claims must be judged from the standpoint of reason. Why 
religions should claim that they are not bound to abide by the standpoint of 
reason, no one knows. If one does not take the standard of reason, there cannot 
be any true judgment, even in the case of religions. One religion may ordain 
something very hideous. Eor instance, the Mohammedan religion allows 
Mohammedans to kill all who are not of their religion. It is clearly stated in the 
Koran, "Kill the infidels if they do not become Mohammedans." They must be 
put to fire and sword. Now if we tell a Mohammedan that this is wrong, he will 
naturally ask, "How do you know that? How do you know it is not good? My 
book says it is." If you say your book is older, there will come the Buddhist, 


and say, my book is much older still. Then will come the Hindu, and say, my 
books are the oldest of all. Therefore referring to books will not do. Where is 
the standard by which you can compare? You will say, look at the Sermon on 
the Mount, and the Mohammedan will reply, look at the Ethics of the Koran. 
The Mohammedan will say, who is the arbiter as to which is the better of the 
two? Neither the New Testament nor the Koran can be the arbiter in a quarrel 
between them. There must be some independent authority, and that cannot be 
any book, but something which is universal; and what is more universal than 
reason? It has been said that reason is not strong enough; it does not always 
help us to get at the Truth; many times it makes mistakes, and, therefore, the 
conclusion is that we must believe in the authority of a church! That was said 
to me by a Roman Catholic, but I could not see the logic of it. On the other 
hand I should say, if reason be so weak, a body of priests would be weaker, and 
I am not going to accept their verdict, but I will abide by my reason, because 
with all its weakness there is some chance of my getting at truth through it; 
while, by the other means, there is no such hope at all. 

We should, therefore, follow reason and also sympathise with those who do not 
come to any sort of belief, following reason. For it is better that mankind 
should become atheist by following reason than blindly believe in two hundred 
millions of gods on the authority of anybody. What we want is progress, 
development, realisation. No theories ever made men higher. No amount of 
books can help us to become purer. The only power is in realisation, and that 
lies in ourselves and comes from thinking. Let men think. A clod of earth never 
thinks; but it remains only a lump of earth. The glory of man is that he is a 
thinking being. It is the nature of man to think and therein he differs from 
animals. I believe in reason and follow reason having seen enough of the evils 
of authority, for I was born in a country where they have gone to the extreme of 
authority. 

The Hindus believe that creation has come out of the Vedas. How do you know 
there is a cow? Because the word cow is in the Vedas. How do you know there 
is a man outside? Because the word man is there. If it had not been, there 
would have been no man outside. That is what they say. Authority with a 
vengeance! And it is not studied as I have studied it, but some of the most 
powerful minds have taken it up and spun out wonderful logical theories round 


it. They have reasoned it out, and there it stands — a whole system of 
philosophy; and thousands of the brightest intellects hare been dedicated 
through thousands of years to the working out of this theory. Such has been the 
power of authority, and great are the dangers thereof. It stunts the growth of 
humanity, and we must not forget that we want growth. Even in all relative 
truth, more than the truth itself, we want the exercise. That is our life. 

The monistic theory has this merit that it is the most rational of all the religious 
theories that we can conceive of. Every other theory, every conception of God 
which is partial and little and personal is not rational. And yet monism has this 
grandeur that it embraces all these partial conceptions of God as being 
necessary for many. Some people say that this personal explanation is 
irrational. But it is consoling; they want a consoling religion and we understand 
that it is necessary for them. The clear light of truth very few in this life can 
bear, much less live up to. It is necessary, therefore, that this comfortable 
religion should exist; it helps many souls to a better one. Small minds whose 
circumference is very limited and which require little things to build them up, 
never venture to soar high in thought. Their conceptions are very good and 
helpful to them, even if only of little gods and symbols. But you have to 
understand the Impersonal, for it is in and through that alone that these others 
can be explained. Take, for instance, the idea of a Personal God. A man who 
understands and believes in the Impersonal — John Stuart Mill, for example — 
may say that a Personal God is impossible, and cannot be proved. I admit with 
him that a Personal God cannot be demonstrated. But He is the highest reading 
of the Impersonal that can be reached by the human intellect, and what else is 
the universe but various readings of the Absolute? It is like a book before us, 
and each one has brought his intellect to read it, and each one has to read it for 
himself. There is something which is common in the intellect of all men; 
therefore certain things appear to be the same to the intellect of mankind. That 
you and I see a chair proves that there is something common to both our minds. 
Suppose a being comes with another sense, he will not see the chair at all; but 
all beings similarly constituted will see the same things. Thus this universe 
itself is the Absolute, the unchangeable, the noumenon; and the phenomenon 
constitutes the reading thereof. Eor you will first find that all phenomena are 
finite. Every phenomenon that we can see, feel, or think of, is finite, limited by 
our knowledge, and the Personal God as we conceive of Him is in fact a 





phenomenon. The very idea of causation exists only in the phenomenal world, 
and God as the cause of this universe must naturally be thought of as limited, 
and yet He is the same Impersonal God. This very universe, as we have seen, is 
the same Impersonal Being read by our intellect. Whatever is reality in the 
universe is that Impersonal Being, and the forms and conceptions are given to it 
by our intellects. Whatever is real in this table is that Being, and the table form 
and all other forms are given by our intellects. 

Now, motion, for instance, which is a necessary adjunct of the phenomenal, 
cannot be predicated of the Universal. Every little bit, every atom inside the 
universe, is in a constant state of change and motion, but the universe as a 
whole is unchangeable, because motion or change is a relative thing; we can 
only think of something in motion in comparison with something which is not 
moving. There must be two things in order to understand motion. The whole 
mass of the universe, taken as a unit, cannot move. In regard to what will it 
move? It cannot be said to change. With regard to what will it change? So the 
whole is the Absolute; but within it every particle is in a constant state of flux 
and change. It is unchangeable and changeable at the same time. Impersonal 
and Personal in one. This is our conception of the universe, of motion and of 
God, and that is what is meant by "Thou art That". Thus we see that the 
Impersonal instead of doing away with the personal, the Absolute instead of 
pulling down the relative, only explains it to the full satisfaction of our reason 
and heart. The Personal God and all that exists in the universe are the same 
Impersonal Being seen through our minds. When we shall be rid of our minds, 
our little personalities, we shall become one with It. This is what is meant by 
"Thou art That". For we must know our true nature, the Absolute. 

The finite, manifested man forgets his source and thinks himself to be entirely 
separate. We, as personalised, differentiated beings, forget our reality, and the 
teaching of monism is not that we shall give up these differentiations, but we 
must learn to understand what they are. We are in reality that Infinite Being, 
and our personalities represent so many channels through which this Infinite 
Reality is manifesting Itself; and the whole mass of changes which we call 
evolution is brought about by the soul trying to manifest more and more of its 
infinite energy. We cannot stop anywhere on this side of the Infinite; our 
power, and blessedness, and wisdom, cannot but grow into the Infinite. Infinite 


power and existence and blessedness are ours, and we have not to acquire 
them; they are our own, and we have only to manifest them. 

This is the central idea of monism, and one that is so hard to understand. From 
my childhood everyone around me taught weakness; I have been told ever 
since I was born that I was a weak thing. It is very difficult for me now to 
realise my own strength, but by analysis and reasoning I gain knowledge of my 
own strength, I realise it. All the knowledge that we have in this world, where 
did it come from? It was within us. What knowledge is outside? None. 
Knowledge was not in matter; it was in man all the time. Nobody ever created 
knowledge; man brings it from within. It is lying there. The whole of that big 
banyan tree which covers acres of ground, was in the little seed which was, 
perhaps, no bigger than one eighth of a mustard seed; all that mass of energy 
was there confined. The gigantic intellect, we know, lies coiled up in the 
protoplasmic cell, and why should not the infinite energy? We know that it is 
so. It may seem like a paradox, but is true. Each one of us has come out of one 
protoplasmic cell, and all the powers we possess were coiled up there. You 
cannot say they came from food; for if you heap up food mountains high, what 
power comes out of it? The energy was there, potentially no doubt, but still 
there. So is infinite power in the soul of man, whether he knows it or not. Its 
manifestation is only a question of being conscious of it. Slowly this infinite 
giant is, as it were, waking up, becoming conscious of his power, and arousing 
himself; and with his growing consciousness, more and more of his bonds are 
breaking, chains are bursting asunder, and the day is sure to come when, with 
the full consciousness of his infinite power and wisdom, the giant will rise to 
his feet and stand erect. Let us all help to hasten that glorious consummation. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


PRACTICAL VEDANTA 
PART IV 

{Delivered in London, 18th November 1896) 

We have been dealing more with the universal so far. This morning I shall try 
to place before you the Vedantic ideas of the relation of the particular to the 
universal. As we have seen, in the dualistic form of Vedic doctrines, the earlier 
forms, there was a clearly defined particular and limited soul for every being. 
There have been a great many theories about this particular soul in each 
individual, but the main discussion was between the ancient Vedantists and the 
ancient Buddhists, the former believing in the individual soul as complete in 
itself, the latter denying in toto the existence of such an individual soul. As I 
told you the other day, it is pretty much the same discussion you have in 
Europe as to substance and quality, one set holding that behind the qualities 
there is something as substance, in which the qualities inhere; and the other 
denying the existence of such a substance as being unnecessary, for the 
qualities may live by themselves. The most ancient theory of the soul, of 
course, is based upon the argument of self-identity — "I am I" — that the I of 
yesterday is the I of today, and the I of today will be the I of tomorrow; that in 
spite of all the changes that are happening to the body, I yet believe that I am 
the same I. This seems to have been the central argument with those who 
believed in a limited, and yet perfectly complete, individual soul. 

On the other hand, the ancient Buddhists denied the necessity of such an 
assumption. They brought forward the argument that all that we know, and all 
that we possibly can know, are simply these changes. The positing of an 
unchangeable and unchanging substance is simply superfluous, and even if 
there were any such unchangeable thing, we could never understand it, nor 
should we ever be able to cognise it in any sense of the word. The same 
discussion you will find at the present time going on in Europe between the 
religionists and the idealists on the one side, and the modern positivists and 
agnostics on the other; one set believing there is something which does not 
change (of whom the latest representative is your Herbert Spencer), that we 







catch a glimpse of something which is unchangeable. And the other is 
represented by the modern Comtists and modern Agnostics. Those of you who 
were interested a few years ago in the discussions between Herbert Spencer and 
Frederick Harrison might have noticed that it was the same old difficulty, the 
one party standing for a substance behind the changeful, and the other party 
denying the necessity for such an assumption. One party says we cannot 
conceive of changes without conceiving of something which does not change; 
the other party brings out the argument that this is superfluous; we can only 
conceive of something which is changing, and as to the unchanging, we can 
neither know, feel, nor sense it. 

In India this great question did not find its solution in very ancient times, 
because we have seen that the assumption of a substance which is behind the 
qualities, and which is not the qualities, can never be substantiated; nay, even 
the argument from self-identity, from memory, — that I am the I of yesterday 
because I remember it, and therefore I have been a continuous something — 
cannot be substantiated. The other quibble that is generally put forward is a 
mere delusion of words. For instance, a man may take a long series of such 
sentences as "I do", "I go", "I dream", "I sleep", "I move", and here you will 
find it claimed that the doing, going, dreaming etc., have been changing, but 
what remained constant was that "I". As such they conclude that the "I" is 
something which is constant and an individual in itself, but all these changes 
belong to the body. This, though apparently very convincing and clear, is based 
upon the mere play on words. The "I" and the doing, going, and dreaming may 
be separate in black and white, but no one can separate them in his mind. 

When I eat, I think of myself as eating — am identified with eating. When I 
run, I and the running are not two separate things. Thus the argument from 
personal identity does not seem to be very strong. The other argument from 
memory is also weak. If the identity of my being is represented by my memory, 
many things which I have forgotten are lost from that identity. And we know 
that people under certain conditions forget their whole past. In many cases of 
lunacy a man will think of himself as made of glass, or as being an animal. If 
the existence of that man depends on memory, he has become glass, which not 
being the case we cannot make the identity of the Self depend on such a flimsy 
substance as memory. Thus we see that the soul as a limited yet complete and 




continuing identity cannot be established as separate from the qualities. We 
cannot establish a narrowed-down, limited existence to which is attached a 
bunch of qualities. 

On the other hand, the argument of the ancient Buddhists seems to be stronger 
— that we do not know, and cannot know, anything that is beyond the bunch of 
qualities. According to them, the soul consists of a bundle of qualities called 
sensations and feelings. A mass of such is what is called the soul, and this mass 
is continually changing. 

The Advaitist theory of the soul reconciles both these positions. The position of 
the Advaitist is that it is true that we cannot think of the substance as separate 
from the qualities, we cannot think of change and not-change at the same time; 
it would be impossible. But the very thing which is the substance is the quality; 
substance and quality are not two things. It is the unchangeable that is 
appearing as the changeable. The unchangeable substance of the universe is not 
something separate from it. The noumenon is not something different from the 
phenomena, but it is the very noumenon which has become the phenomena. 
There is a soul which is unchanging, and what we call feelings and perceptions, 
nay, even the body, are the very soul, seen from another point of view. We 
have got into the habit of thinking that we have bodies and souls and so forth, 
but really speaking, there is only one. 

When I think of myself as the body, I am only a body; it is meaningless to say I 
am something else. And when I think of myself as the soul, the body vanishes, 
and the perception of the body does not remain. None can get the perception of 
the Self without his perception of the body having vanished, none can get 
perception of the substance without his perception of the qualities having 
vanished. 

The ancient illustration of Advaita, of the rope being taken for a snake, may 
elucidate the point a little more. When a man mistakes the rope for a snake, the 
rope has vanished, and when he takes it for a rope, the snake has vanished, and 
the rope only remains. The ideas of dual or treble existence come from 
reasoning on insufficient data, and we read them in books or hear about them, 
until we come under the delusion that we really have a dual perception of the 



soul and the body; but such a perception never really exists. The perception is 
either of the body or of the soul. It requires no arguments to prove it, you can 
verify it in your own minds. 

Try to think of yourself as a soul, as a disembodied something. You will find it 
to be almost impossible, and those few who are able to do so will find that at 
the time when they realise themselves as a soul they have no idea of the body. 
You have heard of, or perhaps have seen, persons who on particular occasions 
had been in peculiar states of mind, brought about by deep meditation, self¬ 
hypnotism, hysteria, or drugs. From their experience you may gather that when 
they were perceiving the internal something, the external had vanished for 
them. This shows that whatever exists is one. That one is appearing in these 
various forms, and all these various forms give rise to the relation of cause and 
effect. The relation of cause and effect is one of evolution — the one becomes 
the other, and so on. Sometimes the cause vanishes, as it were, and in its place 
leaves the effect. If the soul is the cause of the body, the soul, as it were 
vanishes for the time being, and the body remains; and when the body 
vanishes, the soul remains. This theory fits the arguments of the Buddhists that 
were levelled against the assumption of the dualism of body and soul, by 
denying the duality, and showing that the substance and the qualities are one 
and the same thing appearing in various forms. 

We have seen also that this idea of the unchangeable can be established only as 
regards the whole, but never as regards the part. The very idea of part comes 
from the idea of change or motion. Everything that is limited we can 
understand and know, because it is changeable; and the whole must be 
unchangeable, because there is no other thing besides it in relation to which 
change would be possible. Change is always in regard to something which does 
not change, or which changes relatively less. 

According to Advaita, therefore, the idea of the soul as universal, 
unchangeable, and innnortal can be demonstrated as far as possible. The 
difficulty would be as regards the particular. What shall we do with the old 
dualistic theories which have such a hold upon us, and which we have all to 
pass through — these beliefs in limited, little, individual souls? 




We have seen that we are immortal with regard to the whole; but the difficulty 
is, we desire so much to be immortal as parts of the whole. We have seen that 
we are Infinite, and that that is our real individuality. But we want so much to 
make these little souls individual. What becomes of them when we find in our 
everyday experience that these little souls are individuals, with only this 
reservation that they are continuously growing individuals? They are the same, 
yet not the same. The I of yesterday is the I of today, and yet not so, it is 
changed somewhat. Now, by getting rid of the dualistic conception, that in the 
midst of all these changes there is something that does not change, and taking 
the most modern of conceptions, that of evolution, we find that the "I" is a 
continuously changing, expanding entity. 

If it be true that man is the evolution of a mollusc, the mollusc individual is the 
same as the man, only it has to become expanded a great deal. From mollusc to 
man it has been a continuous expansion towards infinity. Therefore the limited 
soul can be styled an individual which is continuously expanding towards the 
Infinite Individual. Perfect individuality will only be reached when it has 
reached the Infinite, but on this side of the Infinite it is a continuously 
changing, growing personality. One of the remarkable features of the Advaitist 
system of Vedanta is to harmonise the preceding systems. In many cases it 
helped the philosophy very much; in some cases it hurt it. Our ancient 
philosophers knew what you call the theory of evolution; that growth is 
gradual, step by step, and the recognition of this led them to harmonise all the 
preceding systems. Thus not one of these preceding ideas was rejected. The 
fault of the Buddhistic faith was that it had neither the faculty nor the 
perception of this continual, expansive growth, and for this reason it never even 
made an attempt to harmonise itself with the preexisting steps towards the 
ideal. They were rejected as useless and harmful. 

This tendency in religion is most harmful. A man gets a new and better idea, 
and then he looks back on those he has given up, and forthwith decides that 
they were mischievous and unnecessary. He never thinks that, however crude 
they may appear from his present point of view, they were very useful to him, 
that they were necessary for him to reach his present state, and that everyone of 
us has to grow in a similar fashion, living first on crude ideas, taking benefit 
from them, and then arriving at a higher standard. With the oldest theories. 


therefore, the Advaita is friendly. Dualism and all systems that had preceded it 
are accepted by the Advaita not in a patronising way, but with the conviction 
that they are true manifestations of the same truth, and that they all lead to the 
same conclusions as the Advaita has reached. 

With blessing, and not with cursing, should be preserved all these various steps 
through which humanity has to pass. Therefore all these dualistic systems have 
never been rejected or thrown out, but have been kept intact in the Vedanta; 
and the dualistic conception of an individual soul, limited yet complete in itself, 
finds its place in the Vedanta. 

According to dualism, man dies and goes to other worlds, and so forth; and 
these ideas are kept in the Vedanta in their entirety. For with the recognition of 
growth in the Advaitist system, these theories are given their proper place by 
admitting that they represent only a partial view of the Truth. 

From the dualistic standpoint this universe can only be looked upon as a 
creation of matter or force, can only be looked upon as the play of a certain 
will, and that will again can only be looked upon as separate from the universe. 
Thus a man from such a standpoint has to see himself as composed of a dual 
nature, body and soul, and this soul, though limited, is individually complete in 
itself. Such a man's ideas of innnortality and of the future life would 
necessarily accord with his idea of soul. These phases have been kept in the 
Vedanta, and it is, therefore, necessary for me to present to you a few of the 
popular ideas of dualism. According to this theory, we have a body, of course, 
and behind the body there is what they call a fine body. This fine body is also 
made of matter, only very fine. It is the receptacle of all our Karma, of all our 
actions and impressions, which are ready to spring up into visible forms. Every 
thought that we think, every deed that we do, after a certain time becomes fine, 
goes into seed form, so to speak, and lives in the fine body in a potential form, 
and after a time it emerges again and bears its results. These results condition 
the life of man. Thus he moulds his own life. Man is not bound by any other 
laws excepting those which he makes for himself. Our thoughts, our words and 
deeds are the threads of the net which we throw round ourselves, for good or 
for evil. Once we set in motion a certain power, we have to take the full 
consequences of it. This is the law of Karma. Behind the subtle body, lives Jiva 


or the individual soul of man. There are various discussions about the form and 
the size of this individual soul. According to some, it is very small like an 
atom; according to others, it is not so small as that; according to others, it is 
very big, and so on. This Jiva is a part of that universal substance, and it is also 
eternal; without beginning it is existing, and without end it will exist. It is 
passing through all these forms in order to manifest its real nature which is 
purity. Every action that retards this manifestation is called an evil action; so 
with thoughts. And every action and every thought that helps the Jiva to 
expand, to manifest its real nature, is good. One theory that is held in common 
in India by the crudest dualists as well as by the most advanced non-dualists is 
that all the possibilities and powers of the soul are within it, and do not come 
from any external source. They are in the soul in potential form, and the whole 
work of life is simply directed towards manifesting those potentialities. 

They have also the theory of reincarnation which says that after the dissolution 
of this body, the Jiva will have another, and after that has been dissolved, it will 
again have another, and so on, either here or in some other worlds; but this 
world is given the preference, as it is considered the best of all worlds for our 
purpose. Other worlds are conceived of as worlds where there is very little 
misery, but for that very reason, they argue, there is less chance of thinking of 
higher things there. As this world contains some happiness and a good deal of 
misery, the Jiva some time or other gets awakened, as it were, and thinks of 
freeing itself. But just as very rich persons in this world have the least chance 
of thinking of higher things, so the Jiva in heaven has little chance of progress, 
for its condition is the same as that of a rich man, only more intensified; it has a 
very fine body which knows no disease, and is under no necessity of eating or 
drinking, and all its desires are fulfilled. The Jiva lives there, having enjoyment 
after enjoyment, and so forgets all about its real nature. Still there are some 
higher worlds, where in spite of all enjoyments, its further evolution is 
possible. Some dualists conceive of the goal as the highest heaven, where souls 
will live with God for ever. They will have beautiful bodies and will know 
neither disease nor death, nor any other evil, and all their desires will be 
fulfilled. From time to time some of them will come back to this earth and take 
another body to teach human beings the way to God; and the great teachers of 
the world have been such. They were already free, and were living with God in 
the highest sphere; but their love and sympathy for suffering humanity was so 


great that they came and incarnated again to teach mankind the way to heaven. 

Of course we know that the Advaita holds that this cannot be the goal or the 
ideal; bodilessness must be the ideal. The ideal cannot be finite. Anything short 
of the Infinite cannot be the ideal, and there cannot be an infinite body. That 
would be impossible, as body comes from limitation. There cannot be infinite 
thought, because thought comes from limitation. We have to go beyond the 
body, and beyond thought too, says the Advaita. And we have also seen that, 
according to Advaita, this freedom is not to be attained, it is already ours. We 
only forget it and deny it. Perfection is not to be attained, it is already within 
us. Immortality and bliss are not to be acquired, we possess them already; they 
have been ours all the time. 

If you dare declare that you are free, free you are this moment. If you say you 
are bound, bound you will remain. This is what Advaita boldly declares. I have 
told you the ideas of the dualists. You can take whichever you like. 

The highest ideal of the Vedanta is very difficult to understand, and people are 
always quarrelling about it, and the greatest difficulty is that when they get 
hold of certain ideas, they deny and fight other ideas. Take up what suits you, 
and let others take up what they need. If you are desirous of clinging to this 
little individuality, to this limited manhood, remain in it, have all these desires, 
and be content and pleased with them. If your experience of manhood has been 
very good and nice, retain it as long as you like; and you can do so, for you are 
the makers of your own fortunes; none can compel you to give up your 
manhood. You will be men as long as you like; none can prevent you. If you 
want to be angels, you will be angels, that is the law. But there may be others 
who do not want to be angels even. What right have you to think that theirs is a 
horrible notion? You may be frightened to lose a hundred pounds, but there 
may be others who would not even wink if they lost all the money they had in 
the world. There have been such men and still there are. Why do you dare to 
judge them according to your standard? You cling on to your limitations, and 
these little worldly ideas may be your highest ideal. You are welcome to them. 
It will be to you as you wish. But there are others who have seen the truth and 
cannot rest in these limitations, who have done with these things and want to 
get beyond. The world with all its enjoyments is a mere mud-puddle for them. 


Why do you want to bind them down to your ideas? You must get rid of this 
tendency once for all. Accord a place to everyone. 

I once read a story about some ships that were caught in a cyclone in the South 
Sea Islands, and there was a picture of it in the Illustrated London News. All of 
them were wrecked except one English vessel, which weathered the storm. The 
picture showed the men who were going to be drowned, standing on the decks 
and cheering the people who were sailing through the storm (H.M.S. Calliope and 
the American men-of-war at Samoa. — Ed). Be brave and generous like that. Do not 
drag others down to where you are. Another foolish notion is that if we lose our 
little individuality, there will be no morality, no hope for humanity. As if 
everybody had been dying for humanity all the time! God bless you! If in every 
country there were two hundred men and women really wanting to do good to 
humanity, the millennium would come in five days. We know how we are 
dying for humanity! These are all tall talks, and nothing else. The history of the 
world shows that those who never thought of their little individuality were the 
greatest benefactors of the human race, and that the more men and women 
think of themselves, the less are they able to do for others. One is 
unselfishness, and the other selfishness. Clinging on to little enjoyments, and to 
desire the continuation and repetition of this state of things is utter selfishness. 
It arises not from any desire for truth, its genesis is not in kindness for other 
beings, but in the utter selfishness of the human heart, in the idea, "I will have 
everything, and do not care for anyone else." This is as it appears to me. I 
would like to see more moral men in the world like some of those grand old 
prophets and sages of ancient times who would have given up a hundred lives 
if they could by so doing benefit one little animal! Talk of morality and doing 
good to others! Silly talk of the present time! 

I would like to see moral men like Gautama Buddha, who did not believe in a 
Personal God or a personal soul, never asked about them, but was a perfect 
agnostic, and yet was ready to lay down his life for anyone, and worked all his 
life for the good of all, and thought only of the good of all. Well has it been 
said by his biographer, in describing his birth, that he was born for the good of 
the many, as a blessing to the many. He did not go to the forest to meditate for 
his own salvation; he felt that the world was burning, and that he must find a 
way out. "Why is there so much misery in the world ?" — was the one question 



that dominated his whole life. Do you think we are so moral as the Buddha? 

The more selfish a man, the more immoral he is. And so also with the race. 

That race which is bound down to itself has been the most cruel and the most 
wicked in the whole world. There has not been a religion that has clung to this 
dualism more than that founded by the Prophet of Arabia, and there has not 
been a religion which has shed so much blood and been so cruel to other men. 
In the Koran there is the doctrine that a man who does not believe these 
teachings should be killed; it is a mercy to kill him! And the surest way to get 
to heaven, where there are beautiful houris and all sorts of sense-enjoyments, is 
by killing these unbelievers. Think of the bloodshed there has been in 
consequence of such beliefs! 

In the religion of Christ there was little of crudeness; there is very little 
difference between the pure religion of Christ and that of the Vedanta. You find 
there the idea of oneness; but Christ also preached dualistic ideas to the people 
in order to give them something tangible to take hold of, to lead them up to the 
highest ideal. The same Prophet who preached, "Our Father which art in 
heaven", also preached, "I and my Father are one", and the same Prophet knew 
that through the "Father in heaven" lies the way to the "I and my Father are 
one". There was only blessing and love in the religion of Christ; but as soon as 
crudeness crept in, it was degraded into something not much better than the 
religion of the Prophet of Arabia. It was crudeness indeed — this fight for the 
little self, this clinging on to the "I", not only in this life, but also in the desire 
for its continuance even after death. This they declare to be unselfishness; this 
the foundation of morality! Lord help us, if this be the foundation of morality! 
And strangely enough, men and women who ought to know better think all 
morality will be destroyed if these little selves go and stand aghast at the idea 
that morality can only stand upon their destruction. The watchword of all well¬ 
being, of all moral good is not "I" but "thou". Who cares whether there is a 
heaven or a hell, who cares if there is a soul or not, who cares if there is an 
unchangeable or not? Here is the world, and it is full of misery. Go out into it 
as Buddha did, and struggle to lessen it or die in the attempt. Forget yourselves; 
this is the first lesson to be learnt, whether you are a theist or an atheist, 
whether you are an agnostic or a Vedantist, a Christian or a Mohammedan. The 
one lesson obvious to all is the destruction of the little self and the building up 


of the Real Self. 


Two forces have been working side by side in parallel lines. The one says "I", 
the other says "not I". Their manifestation is not only in man but in animals, 
not only in animals but in the smallest worms. The tigress that plunges her 
fangs into the warm blood of a human being would give up her own life to 
protect her young. The most depraved man who thinks nothing of taking the 
lives of his brother men will, perhaps, sacrifice himself without any hesitation 
to save his starving wife and children. Thus throughout creation these two 
forces are working side by side; where you find the one, you find the other too. 
The one is selfishness, the other is unselfishness. The one is acquisition, the 
other is renunciation. The one takes, the other gives. From the lowest to the 
highest, the whole universe is the playground of these two forces. It does not 
require any demonstration; it is obvious to all. 

What right has any section of the community to base the whole work and 
evolution of the universe upon one of these two factors alone, upon 
competition and struggle? What right has it to base the whole working of the 
universe upon passion and fight, upon competition and struggle? That these 
exist we do not deny; but what right has anyone to deny the working of the 
other force? Can any man deny that love, this "not I", this renunciation is the 
only positive power in the universe? That other is only the misguided 
employment of the power of love; the power of love brings competition, the 
real genesis of competition is in love. The real genesis of evil is in 
unselfishness. The creator of evil is good, and the end is also good. It is only 
misdirection of the power of good. A man who murders another is, perhaps, 
moved to do so by the love of his own child. His love has become limited to 
that one little baby, to the exclusion of the millions of other human beings in 
the universe. Yet, limited or unlimited, it is the same love. 

Thus the motive power of the whole universe, in what ever way it manifests 
itself, is that one wonderful thing, unselfishness, renunciation, love, the real, 
the only living force in existence. Therefore the Vedantist insists upon that 
oneness. We insist upon this explanation because we cannot admit two causes 
of the universe. If we simply hold that by limitation the same beautiful, 
wonderful love appears to be evil or vile, we find the whole universe explained 


by the one force of love. If not, two causes of the universe have to be taken for 
granted, one good and the other evil, one love and the other hatred. Which is 
more logical? Certainly the one-force theory. 

Let us now pass on to things which do not possibly belong to dualism. I cannot 
stay longer with the dualists. I am afraid. My idea is to show that the highest 
ideal of morality and unselfishness goes hand in hand with the highest 
metaphysical conception, and that you need not lower your conception to get 
ethics and morality, but, on the other hand, to reach a real basis of morality and 
ethics you must have the highest philosophical and scientific conceptions. 
Human knowledge is not antagonistic to human well-being. On the contrary, it 
is knowledge alone that will save us in every department of life — in 
knowledge is worship. The more we know the better for us. The Vedantist says, 
the cause of all that is apparently evil is the limitation of the unlimited. The 
love which gets limited into little channels and seems to be evil eventually 
comes out at the other end and manifests itself as God. The Vedanta also says 
that the cause of all this apparent evil is in ourselves. Do not blame any 
supernatural being, neither be hopeless and despondent, nor think we are in a 
place from which we can never escape unless someone comes and lends us a 
helping hand. That cannot be, says the Vedanta. We are like silkworms; we 
make the thread out of our own substance and spin the cocoon, and in course of 
time are imprisoned inside. But this is not for ever. In that cocoon we shall 
develop spiritual realisation, and like the butterfly come out free. This network 
of Karma we have woven around ourselves; and in our ignorance we feel as if 
we are bound, and weep and wail for help. But help does not come from 
without; it comes from within ourselves. Cry to all the gods in the universe. I 
cried for years, and in the end I found that I was helped. But help came from 
within. And I had to undo what I had done by mistake. That is the only way. I 
had to cut the net which I had thrown round myself, and the power to do this is 
within. Of this I am certain that not one aspiration, well-guided or ill-guided in 
my life, has been in vain, but that I am the resultant of all my past, both good 
and evil. I have committed many mistakes in my life; but mark you, I am sure 
of this that without every one of those mistakes I should not be what I am 
today, and so am quite satisfied to have made them. I do not mean that you are 
to go home and wilfully commit mistakes; do not misunderstand me in that 
way. But do not mope because of the mistakes you have committed, but know 



that in the end all will come out straight. It cannot be otherwise, because 
goodness is our nature, purity is our nature, and that nature can never be 
destroyed. Our essential nature always remains the same. 

What we are to understand is this, that what we call mistakes or evil, we 
commit because we are weak, and we are weak because we are ignorant. I 
prefer to call them mistakes. The word sin, although originally a very good 
word, has got a certain flavour about it that frightens me. Who makes us 
ignorant? We ourselves. We put our hands over our eyes and weep that it is 
dark. Take the hands away and there is light; the light exists always for us, the 
self-effulgent nature of the human soul. Do you not hear what your modern 
scientific men say? What is the cause of evolution? Desire. The animal wants 
to do something, but does not find the environment favourable, and therefore 
develops a new body. Who develops it? The animal itself, its will. You have 
developed from the lowest amoeba. Continue to exercise your will and it will 
take you higher still. The will is almighty. If it is almighty, you may say, why 
cannot I do everything? But you are thinking only of your little self. Look back 
on yourselves from the state of the amoeba to the human being; who made all 
that? Your own will. Can you deny then that it is almighty? That which has 
made you come up so high can make you go higher still. What you want is 
character, strengthening of the will. 

If I teach you, therefore, that your nature is evil, that you should go home and 
sit in sackcloth and ashes and weep your lives out because you took certain 
false steps, it will not help you, but will weaken you all the more, and I shall be 
showing you the road to more evil than good. If this room is full of darkness 
for thousands of years and you come in and begin to weep and wail, "Oh the 
darkness", will the darkness vanish? Strike a match and light comes in a 
moment. What good will it do you to think all your lives, "Oh, I have done evil, 
I have made many mistakes"? It requires no ghost to tell us that. Bring in the 
light and the evil goes in a moment. Build up your character, and manifest your 
real nature, the Effulgent, the Resplendent, the Ever-Pure, and call It up in 
everyone that you see. I wish that everyone of us had come to such a state that 
even in the vilest of human beings we could see the Real Self within, and 
instead of condemning them, say, "Rise thou effulgent one, rise thou who art 
always pure, rise thou birthless and deathless, rise almighty, and manifest thy 


true nature. These little manifestations do not befit thee." This is the highest 
prayer that the Advaita teaches. This is the one prayer, to remember our true 
nature, the God who is always within us, thinking of it always as infinite, 
almighty, ever-good, ever-beneficent, selfless, bereft of all limitations. And 
because that nature is selfless, it is strong and fearless; for only to selfishness 
comes fear. He who has nothing to desire for himself, whom does he fear, and 
what can frighten him? What fear has death for him? What fear has evil for 
him? So if we are Advaitists, we must think from this moment that our old self 
is dead and gone. The old Mr., Mrs., and Miss So-and-so are gone, they were 
mere superstitions, and what remains is the ever-pure, the ever-strong, the 
almighty, the all-knowing — that alone remains for us, and then all fear 
vanishes from us. Who can injure us, the omnipresent? All weakness has 
vanished from us, and our only work is to arouse this knowledge in our 
fellowbeings. We see that they too are the same pure self, only they do not 
know it; we must teach them, we must help them to rouse up their infinite 
nature. This is what I feel to be absolutely necessary all over the world. These 
doctrines are old, older than many mountains possibly. All truth is eternal. 
Truth is nobody's property; no race, no individual can lay any exclusive claim 
to it. Truth is the nature of all souls. Who can lay an, special claim to it? But it 
has to be made practical, to be made simple (for the highest truths are always 
simple), so that it may penetrate every pore of human society, and become the 
property of the highest intellects and the commonest minds, of the man, 
woman, and child at the same time. All these ratiocinations of logic, all these 
bundles of metaphysics, all these theologies and ceremonies may have been 
good in their own time, but let us try to make things simpler and bring about 
the golden days when every man will be a worshipper, and the Reality in every 
man will be the object of worship. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


THE WAY TO THE REALISATION OF 
A UNIVERSAL RELIGION 

{Delivered in the Universalist Church, Pasadena, 

California, 28th January 1900) 

No search has been dearer to the human heart than that which brings to us light 
from God. No study has taken so much of human energy, whether in times past 
or present, as the study of the soul, of God, and of human destiny. However 
immersed we are in our daily occupations, in our ambitions, in our work, in the 
midst of the greatest of our struggles, sometimes there will come a pause; the 
mind stops and wants to know something beyond this world. Sometimes it 
catches glimpses of a realm beyond the senses, and a struggle to get at it is the 
result. Thus it has been throughout the ages, in all countries. Man has wanted to 
look beyond, wanted to expand himself; and all that we call progress, evolution, 
has been always measured by that one search, the search for human destiny, the 
search for God. 

As our social struggles are represented amongst different nations by different 
social organizations, so is man's spiritual struggle represented by various 
religions; and as different social organizations are constantly quarrelling, are 
constantly at war with one another, so these spiritual organisations have been 
constantly at war with one another, constantly quarrelling. Men belonging to a 
particular social organisation claim that the right to live only belongs to them; 
and so long as they can, they want to exercise that right at the cost of the weak. 
We know that just now there is a fierce struggle of that sort going on in South 
Africa. Similarly, each religious sect has; claimed the exclusive right to live. 
And thus we find that though there is nothing that has brought to man more 
blessings than religion, yet at the same time, there is nothing that has brought 
more horror than religion. Nothing has made more for peace and love than 
religion; nothing has engendered fiercer hatred than religion. Nothing has made 
the brotherhood of man more tangible than religion; nothing has bred more 
bitter enmity between man and man than religion. Nothing has built more 
charitable institutions, more hospitals for men, and even for animals, than 
religion; nothing has deluged the world with more blood than religion. We 






know, at the same time, that there has always been an undercurrent of thought; 
there have been always parties of men, philosophers, students of comparative 
religion who have tried and are still trying to bring about harmony in the midst 
of all these jarring and discordant sects. As regards certain countries, these 
attempts have succeeded, but as regards the whole world, they have failed. 

There are some religions which have come down to us from the remotest 
antiquity, which are imbued with the idea that all sects should be allowed to 
live, that every sect has a meaning, a great idea, imbedded within itself, and, 
therefore it is necessary for the good of the world and ought to be helped. In 
modern times the same idea is prevailing and attempts are made from time to 
time to reduce it to practice. These attempts do not always come up to our 
expectations, up to the required efficiency. Nay, to our great disappointment, 
we sometimes find that we are quarrelling all the more. 

Now, leaving aside dogmatic study, and taking a common-sense view of the 
thing, we find at the start that there is a tremendous life-power in all the great 
religions of the world. Some may say that they are ignorant of this, but 
ignorance is no excuse. If a man says "I do not know what is going on in the 
external world, therefore things that are going on in the external world do not 
exist", that man is inexcusable. Now, those of you that watch the movement of 
religious thought all over the world are perfectly aware that not one of the great 
religions of the world has died; not only so, each one of them is progressive. 
Christians are multiplying, Mohammedans are multiplying, the Hindus are 
gaining ground, and the Jews also are increasing, and by their spreading all over 
the world and increasing rapidly, the fold of Judaism is constantly expanding. 

Only one religion of the world — an ancient, great religion — has dwindled 
away, and that is the religion of Zoroastrianism, the religion of the ancient 
Persians. Under the Mohammedan conquest of Persia about a hundred thousand 
of these people came and took shelter in India and some remained in ancient 
Persia. Those that were in Persia, under the constant persecution of the 
Mohammedans, dwindled down till there are at most only ten thousand; in India 
there are about eighty thousand of them, but they do not increase. Of course, 
there is an initial difficulty; they do not convert others to their religion. And 
then, this handful of persons living in India, with the pernicious custom of 




cousin marriage, do not multiply. With this single exception, all the great 
religions are living, spreading, and increasing. We must remember that all the 
great religions of the world are very ancient, not one has been formed at the 
present time, and that every religion of the world owes its origin to the country 
between the Ganga and the Euphrates; not one great religion has arisen in 
Europe, not one in America, not one; every religion is of Asiatic origin and 
belongs to that part of the world. If what the modern scientists say is true, that 
the survival of the fittest is the test, these religions prove by their still living that 
they are yet fit for some people. There is a reason why they should live, they 
bring good to many. Look at the Mohammedans, how they are spreading in 
some places in Southern Asia, and spreading like fire in Africa. The Buddhists 
are spreading all over Central Asia, all the time. The Hindus, like the Jews, do 
not convert others; still gradually, other races are coming within Hinduism and 
adopting the manners and customs of the Hindus and falling into line with 
them. Christianity, you all know, is spreading — though I am not sure that the 
results are equal to the energy put forth. The Christians' attempt at propaganda 
has one tremendous defect — and that is the defect of all Western institutions: 
the machine consumes ninety per cent of the energy, there is too much 
machinery. Preaching has always been the business of the Asiatics. The 
Western people are grand in organisation, social institutions, armies, 
governments, etc.; but when it comes to preaching religion, they cannot come 
near the Asiatic, whose business it has been all the time, and he knows it, and 
he does not use too much machinery. 

This then is a fact in the present history of the human race, that all these great 
religions exist and are spreading and multiplying. Now, there is a meaning, 
certainly, to this; and had it been the will of an All-wise and All-merciful 
Creator that one of these religions should exist and the rest should die, it would 
have become a fact long, long ago. If it were a fact that only one of these 
religions is true and all the rest are false, by this time it would have covered the 
whole ground. But this is not so; not one has gained all the ground. All religions 
sometimes advance — sometimes decline. Now, just think of this: in your own 
country there are more than sixty millions of people, and only twenty-one 
millions professing religions of all sorts. So it is not always progress. In every 
country, probably, if the statistics are taken, you would find that religions are 
sometimes progressing and sometimes going back. Sects are multiplying all the 




time. If the claims of a religion that it has all the truth and God has given it all 
this truth in a certain book were true, why are there so many sects? Fifty years 
do not pass before there are twenty sects founded upon the same book. If God 
has put all the truth in certain books, He does not give us those books in order 
that we may quarrel over texts. That seems to be the fact. Why is it? Even if a 
book were given by God which contained all the truth about religion, it would 
not serve the purpose because nobody could understand the book. Take the 
Bible, for instance, and all the sects that exist amongst Christians; each one puts 
its own interpretation upon the same text, and each says that it alone 
understands that text and all the rest are wrong. So with every religion. There 
are many sects among the Mohammedans and among the Buddhists, and 
hundreds among the Hindus. Now, I bring these facts before you in order to 
show you that any attempt to bring all humanity to one method of thinking in 
spiritual things has been a failure and always will be a failure. Every man that 
starts a theory, even at the present day, finds that if he goes twenty miles away 
from his followers, they will make twenty sects. You see that happening all the 
time. You cannot make all conform to the same ideas: that is a fact, and I thank 
God that it is so. I am not against any sect. I am glad that sects exist, and I only 
wish they may go on multiplying more and more. Why? Simply because of this: 
If you and I and all who are present here were to think exactly the same 
thoughts, there would be no thoughts for us to think. We know that two or more 
forces must come into collision in order to produce motion. It is the clash of 
thought, the differentiation of thought, that awakes thought. Now, if we all 
thought alike, we would be like Egyptian mummies in a museum looking 
vacantly at one another's faces — no more than that! Whirls and eddies occur 
only in a rushing, living stream. There are no whirlpools in stagnant, dead 
water. When religions are dead, there will be no more sects; it will be the 
perfect peace and harmony of the grave. But so long as mankind thinks, there 
will be sects. Variation is the sign of life, and it must be there. I pray that they 
may multiply so that at last there will be as many sects as human beings, and 
each one will have his own method, his individual method of thought in 
religion. 

But this thing exists already. Each one of us is thinking in his own way, but his 
natural course has been obstructed all the time and is still being obstructed. If 
the sword is not used directly, other means will be used. Just hear what one of 


the best preachers in New York says: he preaches that the Filipinos should be 
conquered because that is the only way to teach Christianity to them! They are 
already Catholics; but he wants to make them Presbyterians, and for this, he is 
ready to lay all this terrible sin of bloodshed upon his race. How terrible! And 
this man is one of the greatest preachers of this country, one of the best 
informed men. Think of the state of the world when a man like that is not 
ashamed to stand up and utter such arrant nonsense; and think of the state of the 
world when an audience cheers him! Is this civilisation? It is the old blood¬ 
thirstiness of the tiger, the cannibal, the savage, coming out once more under 
new names, new circumstances. What else can it be? If the state of things is 
such now, think of the horrors through which the world passed in olden times, 
when every sect was trying by every means in its power to tear to pieces the 
other sects. History shows that. The tiger in us is only asleep; it is not dead. 
When opportunities come, it jumps up and, as of old, uses its claws and fangs. 
Apart from the sword, apart from material weapons, there are weapons still 
more terrible — contempt, social hatred, and social ostracism. Now, these are 
the most terrible of all inflictions that are hurled against persons who do not 
think exactly in the same way as we do. And why should everybody think just 
as we do? I do not see any reason. If I am a rational man, I should be glad they 
do not think just as I do. I do not want to live in a grave-like land; I want to be a 
man in a world of men. Thinking beings must differ; difference is the first sign 
of thought. If I am a thoughtful man, certainly I ought to like to live amongst 
thoughtful persons where there are differences of opinion. 

Then arises the question: How can all these varieties be true? If one thing is 
true, its negation is false. How can contradictory opinions be true at the same 
time? This is the question which I intend to answer. But I will first ask you: Are 
all the religions of the world really contradictory? I do not mean the external 
forms in which great thoughts are clad. I do not mean the different buildings, 
languages, rituals, books, etc. employed in various religions, but I mean the 
internal soul of every religion. Every religion has a soul behind it, and that soul 
may differ from the soul of another religion; but are they contradictory? Do 
they contradict or supplement each other? — that is the question. I took up the 
question when I was quite a boy, and have been studying it all my life. 

Thinking that my conclusion may be of some help to you, I place it before you. 

I believe that they are not contradictory; they are supplementary. Each religion. 



as it were, takes up one part of the great universal truth, and spends its whole 
force in embodying and typifying that part of the great truth. It is, therefore, 
addition; not exclusion. That is the idea. System after system arises, each one 
embodying a great idea, and ideals must be added to ideals. And this is the 
march of humanity. Man never progresses from error to truth, but from truth to 
truth, from lesser truth to higher truth — but it is never from error to truth. The 
child may develop more than the father, but was the father inane? The child is 
the father plus something else. If your present state of knowledge is much 
greater than it was when you were a child, would you look down upon that 
stage now? Will you look back and call it inanity? Why, your present stage is 
the knowledge of the child plus something more. 

Then, again, we also know that there may be almost contradictory points of 
view of the same thing, but they will all indicate the same thing. Suppose a man 
is journeying towards the sun, and as he advances he takes a photograph of the 
sun at every stage. When he comes back, he has many photographs of the sun, 
which he places before us. We see that not two are alike, and yet, who will deny 
that all these are photographs of the same sun, from different standpoints? Take 
four photographs of this church from different corners: how different they 
would look, and yet they would all represent this church. In the same way, we 
are all looking at truth from different standpoints, which vary according to our 
birth, education, surroundings, and so on. We are viewing truth, getting as 
much of it as these circumstances will permit, colouring the truth with our own 
heart, understanding it with our own intellect, and grasping it with our own 
mind. We can only know as much of truth as is related to us, as much of it as 
we are able to receive. This makes the difference between man and man, and 
occasions sometimes even contradictory ideas; yet we all belong to the same 
great universal truth. 

My idea, therefore, is that all these religions are different forces in the economy 
of God, working for the good of mankind; and that not one can become dead, 
not one can be killed. Just as you cannot kill any force in nature, so you cannot 
kill any one of these spiritual forces. You have seen that each religion is living. 
From time to time it may retrograde or go forward. At one time, it may be shorn 
of a good many of its trappings; at another time it may be covered with all sorts 
of trappings; but all the same, the soul is ever there, it can never be lost. The 



ideal which every religion represents is never lost, and so every religion is 
intelligently on the march. 

And that universal religion about which philosophers and others have dreamed 
in every country already exists. It is here. As the universal brotherhood of man 
is already existing, so also is universal religion. Which of you, that have 
travelled far and wide, have not found brothers and sisters in every nation? I 
have found them all over the world. Brotherhood already exists; only there are 
numbers of persons who fail to see this and only upset it by crying for new 
brotherhoods. Universal religion, too, is already existing. If the priests and other 
people that have taken upon themselves the task of preaching different religions 
simply cease preaching for a few moments, we shall see it is there. They are 
disturbing it all the time, because it is to their interest. You see that priests in 
every country are very conservative. Why is it so? There are very few priests 
who lead the people; most of them are led by the people and are their slaves and 
servants. If you say it is dry, they say it is so; if you say it is black, they say it is 
black. If the people advance, the priests must advance. They cannot lag behind. 
So, before blaming the priests — it is the fashion to blame the priest — you 
ought to blame yourselves. You only get what you deserve. What would be the 
fate of a priest who wants to give you new and advanced ideas and lead you 
forward? His children would probably starve, and he would be clad in rags. He 
is governed by the same worldly laws as you are. "If you go on," he says, "let 
us march." Of course, there are exceptional souls, not cowed down by public 
opinion. They see the truth and truth alone they value. Truth has got hold of 
them, has got possession of them, as it were, and they cannot but march ahead. 
They never look backward, and for them there are no people. God alone exists 
for them. He is the Light before them, and they are following that Light. 

I met a Mormon gentleman in this country, who tried to persuade me to his 
faith. I said, "I have great respect for your opinions, but in certain points we do 
not agree — I belong to a monastic order, and you believe in marrying many 
wives. But why don't you go to India to preach?" Then he was astonished. He 
said, "Why, you don't believe in any marriage at all, and we believe in 
polygamy, and yet you ask me to go to your country!" I said, "Yes; my 
countrymen will hear every religious thought wherever it may come from. I 
wish you would go to India, first, because I am a great believer in sects. 





Secondly, there are many men in India who are not at all satisfied with any of 
the existing sects, and on account of this dissatisfaction, they will not have 
anything to do with religion, and, possibly, you might get some of them." The 
greater the number of sects, the more chance of people getting religion. In the 
hotel, where there are all sorts of food, everyone has a chance to get his appetite 
satisfied. So I want sects to multiply in every country, that more people may 
have a chance to be spiritual. Do not think that people do not like religion. I do 
not believe that. The preachers cannot give them what they need. The same man 
that may have been branded as an atheist, as a materialist, or what not, may 
meet a man who gives him the truth needed by him, and he may turn out the 
most spiritual man in the community. We can eat only in our own way. For 
instance, we Hindus eat with our fingers. Our fingers are suppler than yours, 
you cannot use your fingers the same way. Not only the food should be 
supplied, but it should be taken in your own particular way. Not only must you 
have the spiritual ideas, but they must come to you according to your own 
method. They must speak your own language, the language of your soul, and 
then alone they will satisfy you. When the man comes who speaks my language 
and gives truth in my language, I at once understand it and receive it for ever. 
This is a great fact. 

Now from this we see that there are various grades and types of human minds 
and what a task religions take upon them! A man brings forth two or three 
doctrines and claims that his religion ought to satisfy all humanity. He goes out 
into the world, God's menagerie, with a little cage in hand, and says, "God and 
the elephant and everybody has to go into this. Even if we have to cut the 
elephant into pieces, he must go in." Again, there may be a sect with a few good 
ideas. Its followers say, "All men must come in! " "But there is no room for 
them." "Never mind! Cut them to pieces; get them in anyhow; if they don't get 
in, why, they will be damned." No preacher, no sect, have I ever met that 
pauses and asks, "Why is it that people do not listen to us?" Instead, they curse 
the people and say, "The people are wicked." They never ask, "How is it that 
people do not listen to my words? Why cannot I make them see the truth? Why 
cannot I speak in their language? Why cannot I open their eyes?" Surely, they 
ought to know better, and when they find people do not listen to them, if they 
curse anybody, it should be themselves. But it is always the people's fault! They 
never try to make their sect large enough to embrace every one. 


Therefore we at once see why there has been so much narrow-mindedness, the 
part always claiming to be the whole; the little, finite unit always laying claim 
to the infinite. Think of little sects, born within a few hundred years out of 
fallible human brains, making this arrogant claim of knowledge of the whole of 
God's infinite truth! Think of the arrogance of it! If it shows anything, it is this, 
how vain human beings are. And it is no wonder that such claims have always 
failed, and, by the mercy of the Lord, are always destined to fail. In this line the 
Mohammedans were the best off; every step forward was made with the sword 
— the Koran in the one hand and the sword in the other: "Take the Koran, or 
you must die; there is no alternative! " You know from history how phenomenal 
was their success; for six hundred years nothing could resist them, and then 
there came a time when they had to cry halt. So will it be with other religions if 
they follow the same methods. We are such babes! We always forget human 
nature. When we begin life, we think that our fate will be something 
extraordinary, and nothing can make us disbelieve that. But when we grow old, 
we think differently. So with religions. In their early stages, when they spread a. 
little, they get the idea that they can change the minds of the whole human race 
in a few years, and go on killing and massacring to make converts by force; 
then they fail, and begin to understand better. We see that these sects did not 
succeed in what they started out to do, which was a great blessing. Just think if 
one of those fanatical sects had succeeded all over the world, where would man 
be today? Now, the Lord be blessed that they did not succeed! Yet, each one 
represents a great truth; each religion represents a particular excellence — 
something which is its soul. There is an old story which comes to my mind: 
There were some ogresses who used to kill people and do all sorts of mischief; 
but they themselves could not be killed, until someone found out that their souls 
were in certain birds, and so long as the birds were safe nothing could destroy 
the ogresses. So, each one of us has, as it were, such a bird, where our soul is; 
has an ideal, a mission to perform in life. Every human being is an embodiment 
of such an ideal, such a mission. Whatever else you may lose, so long as that 
ideal is not lost, and that mission is not hurt, nothing can kill you. Wealth may 
come and go, misfortunes may pile mountains high, but if you have kept the 
ideal entire, nothing can kill you. You may have grown old, even a hundred 
years old, but if that mission is fresh and young in your heart, what can kill 
you? But when that ideal is lost and that mission is hurt, nothing can save you. 
All the wealth, all the pourer of the world will not save you. And what are 


nations but multiplied individuals? So, each nation has a mission of its own to 
perform in this harmony of races; and so long as that nation keeps to that ideal, 
that nation nothing can kill; but if that nation gives up its mission in life and 
goes after something else, its life becomes short, and it vanishes. 

And so with religions. The fact that all these old religions are living today 
proves that they must have kept that mission intact; in spite of all their 
mistakes, in spite of all difficulties, in spite of all quarrels, in spite of all the 
incrustation of forms and figures, the heart of every one of them is sound — it 
is a throbbing, beating, living heart. They have not lost, any one of them, the 
great mission they came for. And it is splendid to study that mission. Take 
Mohammedanism, for instance. Christian people hate no religion in the world 
so much as Mohammedanism. They think it is the very worst form of religion 
that ever existed. As soon as a man becomes a Mohammedan, the whole of 
Islam receives him as a brother with open arms, without making any 
distinction, which no other religion does. If one of your American Indians 
becomes a Mohammedan, the Sultan of Turkey would have no objection to dine 
with him. If he has brains, no position is barred to him. In this country, I have 
never yet seen a church where the white man and the negro can kneel side by 
side to pray. Just think of that: Islam makes its followers all equal — so, that, 
you see, is the peculiar excellence of Mohammedanism. In many places in the 
Koran you find very sensual ideas of life. Never mind. What Mohammedanism 
comes to preach to the world is this practical brotherhood of all belonging to 
their faith. That is the essential part of the Mohammedan religion; and all the 
other ideas about heaven and of life etc., are not Mohammedanism. They are 
accretions. 

With the Hindus you will find one national idea — spirituality. In no other 
religion, in no other sacred books of the world, will you find so much energy 
spent in defining the idea of God. They tried to define the ideal of soul so that 
no earthly touch might mar it. The spirit must be divine; and spirit understood 
as spirit must not be made into a man. The same idea of unity, of the realisation 
of God, the omnipresent, is preached throughout. They think it is all nonsense 
to say that He lives in heaven, and all that. It is a mere human, anthropomorphic 
idea. All the heaven that ever existed is now and here. One moment in infinite 
time is quite as good as any other moment. If you believe in a God, you can see 



Him even now. We think religion begins when you have realised something. It 
is not believing in doctrines, nor giving intellectual assent, nor making 
declarations. If there is a God, have you seen Him? If you say "no", then what 
right have you to believe in Him? If you are in doubt whether there is a God, 
why do you not struggle to see Him? Why do you not renounce the world and 
spend the whole of your life for this one object? Renunciation and spirituality 
are the two great ideas of India, and it is because India clings to these ideas that 
all her mistakes count for so little. 

With the Christians, the central idea that has been preached by them is the 
same: "Watch and pray, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand" — which 
means, purify your minds and be ready! And that spirit never dies. You 
recollect that the Christians are, even in the darkest days, even in the most 
superstitious Christian countries, always trying to prepare themselves for the 
coming of the Lord, by trying to help others, building hospitals, and so on. So 
long as the Christians keep to that ideal, their religion lives. 

Now an ideal presents itself to my mind. It may be only a dream. I do not know 
whether it will ever be realised in this world, but sometimes it is better to dream 
a dream, than die on hard facts. Great truths, even in a dream are good, better 
than bad facts. So, let us dream a dream. 

You know that there are various grades of mind. You may be a matter-of-fact, 
common-sense rationalist: you do not care for forms and ceremonies; you want 
intellectual, hard, ringing facts, and they alone will satisfy you. Then there are 
the Puritans, the Mohammedans, who will not allow a picture or a statue in 
their place of worship. Very well! But there is another man who is more artistic. 
He wants a great deal of art — beauty of lines and curves, the colours, flowers, 
forms; he wants candles, lights, and all the insignia and paraphernalia of ritual, 
that he may see God. His mind takes God in those forms, as yours takes Him 
through the intellect. Then, there is the devotional man, whose soul is crying for 
God: he has no other idea but to worship God, and to praise Him. Then again, 
there is the philosopher, standing outside all these, mocking at them. He thinks, 
"What nonsense they are! What ideas about God!" 

They may laugh at one another, but each one has a place in this world. All these 



various minds, all these various types are necessary. If there ever is going to be 
an ideal religion, it must be broad and large enough to supply food for all these 
minds. It must supply the strength of philosophy to the philosopher, the 
devotee's heart to the worshipper; to the ritualist, it will give all that the most 
marvellous symbolism can convey; to the poet, it will give as much of heart as 
he can take in, and other things besides. To make such a broad religion, we 
shall have to go back to the time when religions began and take them all in. 

Our watchword, then, will be acceptance, and not exclusion. Not only 
toleration, for so-called toleration is often blasphemy, and I do not believe in it. 
I believe in acceptance. Why should I tolerate? Toleration means that I think 
that you are wrong and I am just allowing you to live. Is it not a blasphemy to 
think that you and I are allowing others to live? I accept all religions that were 
in the past, and worship with them all; I worship God with every one of them, 
in whatever form they worship Him. I shall go to the mosque of the 
Mohammedan; I shall enter the Christian's church and kneel before the crucifix; 
I shall enter the Buddhistic temple, where I shall take refuge in Buddha and in 
his Law. I shall go into the forest and sit down in meditation with the Hindu, 
who is trying to see the Light which enlightens the heart of every one. 

Not only shall I do all these, but I shall keep my heart open for all that may 
come in the future. Is God's book finished? Or is it still a continuous revelation 
going on? It is a marvellous book — these spiritual revelations of the world. 
The Bible, the Vedas, the Koran, and all other sacred books are but so many 
pages, and an infinite number of pages remain yet to be unfolded. I would leave 
it open for all of them. We stand in the present, but open ourselves to the 
infinite future. We take in all that has been in the past, enjoy the light of the 
present, and open every window of the heart for all that will come in the future. 
Salutation to all the prophets of the past, to all the great ones of the present, and 
to all that are to come in the future! 


» 



Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 

« 

THE IDEAL OF A UNIVERSAL RELIGION 

How IT MUST Embrace Different Types of Minds and Methods 

Wheresoever our senses reach, or whatsoever our minds imagine, we find 
therein the action and reaction of two forces, the one counteracting the other and 
causing the constant play of the mixed phenomena that we see around us, and of 
those which we feel in our minds. In the external world, the action of these 
opposite forces is expressing itself as attraction and repulsion, or as centripetal 
and centrifugal forces; and in the internal, as love and hatred, good and evil. We 
repel some things, we attract others. We are attracted by one, we are repelled by 
another. Many times in our lives we find that without any reason whatsoever we 
are, as it were, attracted towards certain persons; at other times, similarly, we 
are repelled by others. This is patent to all, and the higher the field of action, the 
more potent, the more remarkable, are the influences of these opposite forces. 
Religion is the highest plane of human thought and life, and herein we find that 
the workings of these two forces have been most marked. The intensest love 
that humanity has ever known has come from religion, and the most diabolical 
hatred that humanity has known has also come from religion. The noblest words 
of peace that the world has ever heard have come from men on the religious 
plane, and the bitterest denunciation that the world has ever known has been 
uttered by religious men. The higher the object of any religion and the finer its 
organisation, he more remarkable are its activities. No other human motive has 
deluged the world with blood so much as religion; at the same time, nothing has 
brought into existence so many hospitals and asylums for the poor; no other 
human influence has taken such care, not only of humanity, but also of the 
lowest of animals, as religion has done. Nothing makes us so cruel as religion, 
and nothing makes us so tender as religion. This has been so in the past, and 
will also, in all probability, be so in the future. Yet out of the midst of this din 
and turmoil, this strife and struggle, this hatred and jealousy of religions and 
sects, there have arisen, from time to time, potent voices, drowning all this noise 
— making themselves heard from pole to pole, as it were — proclaiming peace 
and harmony. Will it ever come? 

Is it possible that there should ever reign unbroken harmony in this plane of 






mighty religious struggle. The world is exercised in the latter part of this 
century by the question of harmony; in society, various plans are being 
proposed, and attempts are made to carry them into practice; but we know how 
difficult it is to do so. People find that it is almost impossible to mitigate the 
fury of the struggle of life, to tone down the tremendous nervous tension that is 
in man. Now, if it is so difficult to bring harmony and peace to the physical 
plane of life — the external, gross, and outward side of it — then a thousand 
times more difficult is it to bring peace and harmony to rule over the internal 
nature of man. I would ask you for the time being to come out of the network of 
words. We have all been hearing from childhood of such things as love, peace, 
charity, equality, and universal brotherhood; but they have become to us mere 
words without meaning, words which we repeat like parrots, and it has become 
quite natural for us to do so. We cannot help it. Great souls, who first felt these 
great ideas in their hearts, manufactured these words; and at that time many 
understood their meaning. Later on, ignorant people have taken up those words 
to play with them and made religion a mere play upon words, and not a thing to 
be carried into practice. It becomes "my father's religion", "our nation's 
religion", "our country's religion", and so forth. It becomes only a phase of 
patriotism to profess any religion, and patriotism is always partial. To bring 
harmony into religion must always be difficult. Yet we will consider this 
problem of the harmony of religions. 

We see that in every religion there are three parts — I mean in every great and 
recognised religion. First, there is the philosophy which presents the whole 
scope of that religion, setting forth its basic principles, the goal and the means 
of reaching it. The second part is mythology, which is philosophy made 
concrete. It consists of legends relating to the lives of men, or of supernatural 
beings, and so forth. It is the abstractions of philosophy concretised in the more 
or less imaginary lives of men and supernatural beings. The third part is the 
ritual. This is still more concrete and is made up of forms and ceremonies, 
various physical attitudes, flowers and incense, and many other things, that 
appeal to the senses. In these consists the ritual. You will find that all 
recognised religions have these three elements. Some lay more stress on one, 
some on another. Let us now take into consideration the first part, philosophy. Is 
there one universal philosophy? Not yet. Each religion brings out its own 
doctrines and insists upon them as being the only true ones. And not only does it 


do that, but it thinks that he who does not believe in them must go to some 
horrible place. Some will even draw the sword to compel others to believe as 
they do. This is not through wickedness, but through a particular disease of the 
human brain called fanaticism. They are very sincere, these fanatics, the most 
sincere of human beings; but they are quite as irresponsible as other lunatics in 
the world. This disease of fanaticism is one of the most dangerous of all 
diseases. All the wickedness of human nature is roused by it. Anger is stirred 
up, nerves are strung high, and human beings become like tigers. 

Is there any mythological similarity, is there any mythological harmony, any 
universal mythology accepted by all religions? Certainly not. All religions have 
their own mythology, only each of them says, "My stories are not mere myths." 
Let us try to understand the question by illustration. I simply mean to illustrate, 

I do not mean criticism of any religion. The Christian believes that God took the 
shape of a dove and came down to earth; to him this is history, and not 
mythology. The Hindu believes that God is manifested in the cow. Christians 
say that to believe so is mere mythology, and not history, that it is superstition. 
The Jews think that if an image be made in the form of a box, or a chest, with an 
angel on either side, then it may be placed in the Holy of Holies; it is sacred to 
Jehovah; but if the image be made in the form of a beautiful man or woman, 
they say, "This is a horrible idol; break it down! " This is our unity in 
mythology! If a man stands up and says, "My prophet did such and such a 
wonderful thing", others will say, "That is only superstition", but at the same 
time they say that their own prophet did still more wonderful things, which they 
hold to be historical. Nobody in the world, as far as I have seen, is able to make 
out the fine distinction between history and mythology, as it exists in the brains 
of these persons. All such stories, to whatever religion they may belong, are 
really mythological, mixed up occasionally, it may be with, a little history. 

Next come the rituals. One sect has one particular form of ritual and thinks that 
that is holy, while the rituals of another sect are simply arrant superstition. If 
one sect worships a peculiar sort of symbol, another sect says, "Oh, it is 
horrible!" Take, for instance, a general form of symbol. The phallus symbol is 
certainly a sexual symbol, but gradually that aspect of it has been forgotten, and 
it stands now as a symbol of the Creator. Those nations which have this as their 
symbol never think of it as the phallus; it is just a symbol, and there it ends. But 


a man from another race or creed sees in it nothing but the phallus, and begins 
to condemn it; yet at the same time he may be doing something which to the so- 
called phallic worshippers appears most horrible. Let me take two points for 
illustration, the phallus symbol and the sacrament of the Christians. To the 
Christians the phallus is horrible, and to the Hindus the Christian sacrament is 
horrible. They say that the Christian sacrament, the killing of a man and the 
eating of his flesh and the drinking of his blood to get the good qualities of that 
man, is cannibalism. This is what some of the savage tribes do; if a man is 
brave, they kill him and eat his heart, because they think that it will give them 
the qualities of courage and bravery possessed by that man. Even such a devout 
Christian as Sir John Lubbock admits this and says that the origin of this 
Christian symbol is in this savage idea. The Christians, of course, do not admit 
this view of its origin; and what it may imply never comes to their mind. It 
stands for holy things, and that is all they want to know. So even in rituals there 
is no universal symbol, which can command general recognition and 
acceptance. Where then is any universality? How is it possible then to have a 
universal form of religion? That, however, already exists. And let us see what it 
is. 

We all hear about universal brotherhood, and how societies stand up especially 
to preach this. I remember an old story. In India, taking wine is considered very 
bad. There were two brothers who wished, one night, to drink wine secretly; and 
their uncle, who was a very orthodox man was sleeping in a room quite close to 
theirs. So, before they began to drink, they said to each other, "We must be very 
silent, or uncle will wake up." When they were drinking, they continued 
repeating to each other "Silence! Uncle will wake up", each trying to shout the 
other down. And, as the shouting increased, the uncle woke up, came into the 
room, and discovered the whole thing. Now, we all shout like these drunken 
men," Universal brotherhood! We are all equal, therefore let us make a sect." As 
soon as you make a sect you protest against equality, and equality is no more. 
Mohammedans talk of universal brotherhood, but what comes out of that in 
reality? Why, anybody who is not a Mohammedan will not be admitted into the 
brotherhood; he will more likely have his throat cut. Christians talk of universal 
brotherhood; but anyone who is not a Christian must go to that place where he 
will be eternally barbecued. 


And so we go on in this world in our search after universal brotherhood and 
equality. When you hear such talk in the world, I would ask you to be a little 
reticent, to take care of yourselves, for, behind all this talk is often the intensest 
selfishness. "In the winter sometimes a thunder-cloud comes up; it roars and 
roars, but it does not rain; but in the rainy season the clouds speak not, but 
deluge the world with water." So those who are really workers, and really feel 
at heart the universal brotherhood of man, do not talk much, do not make little 
sects for universal brotherhood; but their acts, their movements, their whole life, 
show out clearly that they in truth possess the feeling of brotherhood for 
mankind, that they have love and sympathy for all. They do not speak, they do 
and they live. This world is too full of blustering talk. We want a little more 
earnest work, and less talk. 

So far we see that it is hard to find any universal features in regard to religion, 
and yet we know that they exist. We are all human beings, but are we all equal? 
Certainly not. Who says we are equal? Only the lunatic. Are we all equal in our 
brains, in our powers, in our bodies? One man is stronger than another, one man 
has more brain power than another. If we are all equal, why is there this 
inequality? Who made it? We. Because we have more or less powers, more or 
less brain, more or less physical strength, it must make a difference between us. 
Yet we know that the doctrine of equality appeals to our heart. We are all 
human beings; but some are men, and some are women. Here is a black man, 
there is a white man; but all are men, all belong to one humanity. Various are 
our faces; I see no two alike, yet we are all human beings. Where is this one 
humanity? I find a man or a woman, either dark or fair; and among all these 
faces I know that there is an abstract humanity which is common to all. I may 
not find it when I try to grasp it, to sense it, and to actualise it, yet I know for 
certain that it is there. If I am sure of anything, it is of this humanity which is 
common to us all. It is through this generalised entity that I see you as a man or 
a woman. So it is with this universal religion, which runs through all the various 
religions of the world in the form of God; it must and does exist through 
eternity. "I am the thread that runs through all these pearls," and each pearl is a 
religion or even a sect thereof. Such are the different pearls, and the Lord is the 
thread that runs through all of them; only the majority of mankind are entirely 
unconscious of it. 


Unity in variety is the plan of the universe. We are all men, and yet we are all 
distinct from one another. As a part of humanity I am one with you, and as Mr. 
So-and-so I am different from you. As a man you are separate from the woman; 
as a human being you are one with the woman. As a man you are separate from 
the animal, but as living beings, man, woman, animal, and plant are all one; and 
as existence, you are one with the whole universe. That universal existence is 
God, the ultimate Unity in the universe. In Him we are all one. At the same 
time, in manifestation, these differences must always remain. In our work, in 
our energies, as they are being manifested outside, these differences must 
always remain. We find then that if by the idea of a universal religion it is meant 
that one set of doctrines should be believed in by all mankind it is wholly 
impossible. It can never be, there can never be a time when all faces will be the 
same. Again, if we expect that there will be one universal mythology, that is 
also impossible; it cannot be. Neither can there be one universal ritual. Such a 
state of things can never come into existence; if it ever did, the world would be 
destroyed, because variety is the first principle of life. What makes us formed 
beings? Differentiation. Perfect balance would be our destruction. Suppose the 
amount of heat in this room, the tendency of which is towards equal and perfect 
diffusion, gets that kind of diffusion, then for all practical purposes that heat 
will cease to be. What makes motion possible in this universe? Lost balance. 

The unity of sameness can come only when this universe is destroyed, otherwise 
such a thing is impossible. Not only so, it would be dangerous to have it. We 
must not wish that all of us should think alike. There would then be no thought 
to think. We should be all alike, as the Egyptian mununies in a museum, 
looking at each other without a thought to think. It is this difference, this 
differentiation, this losing of the balance between us, which is the very soul of 
our progress, the soul of all our thought. This must always be. 

What then do I mean by the ideal of a universal religion? I do not mean any one 
universal philosophy, or any one universal mythology, or any one universal 
ritual held alike by all; for I know that this world must go on working, wheel 
within wheel, this intricate mass of machinery, most complex, most wonderful. 
What can we do then? We can make it run smoothly, we can lessen the friction, 
we can grease the wheels, as it were. How? By recognising the natural necessity 
of variation. Just as we have recognised unity by our very nature, so we must 
also recognise variation. We must learn that truth may be expressed in a 


hundred thousand ways, and that each of these ways is true as far as it goes. We 
must learn that the same thing can be viewed from a hundred different 
standpoints, and vet be the same thing. Take for instance the sun. Suppose a 
man standing on the earth looks at the sun when it rises in the morning; he sees 
a big ball. Suppose he starts on a journey towards the sun and takes a camera 
with him, taking photographs at every stage of his journey, until he reaches the 
sun. The photographs of each stage will be seen to be different from those of the 
other stages; in fact, when he gets back, he brings with him so many 
photographs of so many different suns, as it would appear; and yet we know that 
the same sun was photographed by the man at the different stages of his 
progress. Even so is it with the Lord. Through high philosophy or low, through 
the most exalted mythology or the grossest, through the most refined ritualism 
or arrant fetishism, every sect, every soul, every nation, every religion, 
consciously or unconsciously, is struggling upward, towards God; every vision 
of truth that man has, is a vision of Him and of none else. Suppose we all go 
with vessels in our hands to fetch water from a lake. One has a cup, another a 
jar, another a bucket, and so forth, and we all fill our vessels. The water in each 
case naturally takes the form of the vessel carried by each of us. He who 
brought the cup has the water in the form of a cup; he who brought the jar — his 
water is in the shape of ajar, and so forth; but, in every case, water, and nothing 
but water, is in the vessel. So it is in the case of religion; our minds are like 
these vessels, and each one of us is trying to arrive at the realisation of God. 

God is like that water filling these different vessels, and in each vessel the 
vision of God comes in the form of the vessel. Yet He is One. He is God in 
every case. This is the only recognition of universality that we can get. 

So far it is all right theoretically. But is there any way of practically working out 
this harmony in religions? We find that this recognition that all the various 
views of religion are true has been very very old. Hundreds of attempts have 
been made in India, in Alexandria, in Europe, in China, in Japan, in Tibet, and 
lastly in America, to formulate a harmonious religious creed, to make all 
religions come together in love. They have all failed, because they did not adopt 
any practical plan. Many have admitted that all the religions of the world are 
right, but they show no practical way of bringing them together, so as to enable 
each of them to maintain its own individuality in the conflux. That plan alone is 
practical, which does not destroy the individuality of any man in religion and at 


the same time shows him a point of union with all others. But so far, all the 
plans of religious harmony that have been tried, while proposing to take in all 
the various views of religion, have, in practice, tried to bind them all down to a 
few doctrines, and so have produced more new sects, fighting, struggling, and 
pushing against each other. 

I have also my little plan. I do not know whether it will work or not, and I want 
to present it to you for discussion. What is my plan? In the first place I would 
ask mankind to recognise this maxim, "Do not destroy". Iconoclastic reformers 
do no good to the world. Break not, pull not anything down, but build. Help, if 
you can; if you cannot, fold your hands and stand by and see things go on. Do 
not injure, if you cannot render help. Say not a word against any man's 
convictions so far as they are sincere. Secondly, take man where he stands, and 
from there give him a lift. If it be true that God is the centre of all religions, and 
that each of us is moving towards Him along one of these radii, then it is certain 
that all of us must reach that centre. And at the centre, where all the radii meet, 
all our differences will cease; but until we reach there, differences there must 
be. All these radii converge to the same centre. One, according to his nature, 
travels along one of these lines, and another, along another; and if we all push 
onward along our own lines, we shall surely come to the centre, because, "All 
roads lead to Rome". Each of us is naturally growing and developing according 
to his own nature; each will in time come to know the highest truth for after all, 
men must teach themselves. What can you and I do? Do you think you can 
teach even a child? You cannot. The child teaches himself. Your duty is to 
afford opportunities and to remove obstacles. A plant grows. Do you make the 
plant grow? Your duty is to put a hedge round it and see that no animal eats up 
the plant, and there your duty ends. The plant grows of itself. So it is in regard 
to the spiritual growth of every man. None can teach you; none can make a 
spiritual man of you. You have to teach yourself; your growth must come from 
inside. 

What can an external teacher do? He can remove the obstructions a little, and 
there his duty ends. Therefore help, if you can; but do not destroy. Give up all 
ideas that you can make men spiritual. It is impossible. There is no other teacher 
to you than your own soul. Recognise this. What comes of it? In society we see 
so many different natures. There are thousands and thousands of varieties of 


minds and inclinations. A thorough generalisation of them is impossible, but for 
our practical purpose it is sufficient to have them characterised into four classes. 
First, there is the active man, the worker; he wants to work, and there is 
tremendous energy in his muscles and his nerves. His aim is to work — to build 
hospitals, do charitable deeds, make streets, to plan and to organise. Then there 
is the emotional man who loves the sublime and the beautiful to an excessive 
degree. He loves to think of the beautiful, to enjoy the aesthetic side of nature, 
and adore Love and the God of Love. He loves with his whole heart the great 
souls of all times, the prophets of religions, and the Incarnations of God on 
earth; he does not care whether reason can or cannot prove that Christ or 
Buddha existed; he does not care for the exact date when the Sermon on the 
Mount was preached, or for the exact moment of Krishna's birth; what he cares 
for is their personalities, their lovable figures. Such is his ideal. This is the 
nature of the lover, the emotional man. Then, there is the mystic whose mind 
wants to analyse its own self, to understand the workings of the human mind, 
what the forces are that are working inside, and how to know, manipulate, and 
obtain control over them. This is the mystical mind. Then, there is the 
philosopher who wants to weigh everything and use his intellect even beyond 
the possibilities of all human philosophy. 

Now a religion, to satisfy the largest proportion of mankind, must be able to 
supply food for all these various types of minds; and where this capability is 
wanting, the existing sects all become one-sided. Suppose you go to a sect 
which preaches love and emotion. They sing and weep, and preach love. But as 
soon as you say, "My friend, that is all right, but I want something stronger than 
this — a little reason and philosophy; I want to understand things step by step 
and more rationally", they say, "Get out"; and they not only ask you to get out 
but would send you to the other place, if they could. The result is that that sect 
can only help people of an emotional turn of mind. They not only do not help 
others, but try to destroy them; and the most wicked part of the whole thing is 
that they will not only not help others, but do not believe in their sincerity. 
Again, there are philosophers who talk of the wisdom of India and the East and 
use big psychological terms, fifty syllables long, but if an ordinary man like me 
goes to them and says, "Can you tell me anything to make me spiritual?", the 
first thing they would do would be to smile and say, "Oh, you are too far below 
us in your reason. What can you understand about spirituality?" These are high- 


up philosophers. They simply show you the door. Then there are the mystical 
sects who speak all sorts of things about different planes of existence, different 
states of mind, and what the power of the mind can do, and so on; and if you are 
an ordinary man and say, "Show me anything good that I can do; I am not much 
given to speculation; can you give me anything that will suit me?", they will 
smile and say, "Listen to that fool; he knows nothing, his existence is for 
nothing." And this is going on everywhere in the world. I would like to get 
extreme exponents of all these different sects, and shut them up in a room, and 
photograph their beautiful derisive smiles! 

This is the existing condition of religion, the existing condition of things. What I 
want to propagate is a religion that will be equally acceptable to all minds; it 
must be equally philosophic, equally emotional, equally mystic, and equally 
conducive to action. If professors from the colleges come, scientific men and 
physicists, they will court reason. Let them have it as much as they want. There 
will be a point beyond which they will think they cannot go, without breaking 
with reason. They will say, "These ideas of God and salvation are superstitious, 
guise them up! "I say, "Mr. Philosopher, this body of yours is a bigger 
superstition. Give it up, don't go home to dinner or to your philosophic chair. 
Give up the body, and if you cannot, cry quarter and sit down." For religion 
must be able to show how to realise the philosophy that teaches us that this 
world is one, that there is but one Existence in the universe. Similarly, if the 
mystic comes, we must welcome him, be ready to give him the science of 
mental analysis, and practically demonstrate it before him. And if emotional 
people come, we must sit, laugh, and weep with them in the name of the Lord; 
we must "drink the cup of love and become mad". If the energetic worker 
comes, we must work with him, with all the energy that we have. And this 
combination will be the ideal of the nearest approach to a universal religion. 
Would to God that all men were so constituted that in their minds all these 
elements of philosophy, mysticism, emotion, and of work were equally present 
in full! That is the ideal, my ideal of a perfect man. Everyone who has only one 
or two of these elements of character, I consider "one-sided"; and this world is 
almost full of such "one-sided" men, with knowledge of that one road only in 
which they move; and anything else is dangerous and horrible to them. To 
become harmoniously balanced in all these four directions is my ideal of 
religion. And this religion is attained by what we, in India, call Yoga — union. 


To the worker, it is union between men and the whole of humanity; to the 
mystic, between his lower and Higher Self; to the lover, union between himself 
and the God of Love; and to the philosopher; it is the union of all existence. 

This is what is meant by Yoga. This is a Sanskrit term, and these four divisions 
of Yoga have in Sanskrit different names. The man who seeks after this kind of 
union is called a Yogi. The worker is called the Karma-Yogi. He who seeks the 
union through love is called the Bhakti-Yogi. He who seeks it through 
mysticism is called the Raj a-Yogi. And he who seeks it through philosophy is 
called the Jnana-Yogi So this word Yogi comprises them all. 

Now first of all let me take up Raj a-Yoga. What is this Raj a-Yoga, this 
controlling of the mind? In this country you are associating all sorts of 
hobgoblins with the word Yoga, I am afraid. Therefore, I must start by telling 
you that it has nothing to do with such things. No one of these Yogas gives up 
reason, no one of them asks you to be hoodwinked, or to deliver your reason 
into the hands of priests of any type whatsoever. No one of them asks that you 
should give your allegiance to any superhuman messenger. Each one of them 
tells you to cling to your reason to hold fast to it. We find in all beings three 
sorts of instruments of knowledge. The first is instinct, which you find most 
highly developed in animals; this is the lowest instrument of knowledge. What 
is the second instrument of knowledge? Reasoning. You find that most highly 
developed in man. Now in the first place, instinct is an inadequate instrument; to 
animals, the sphere of action is very limited, and within that limit instinct acts. 
When you come to man, you see it is largely developed into reason. The sphere 
of action also has here become enlarged. Yet even reason is still very 
insufficient. Reason can go only a little way and then it stops, it cannot go any 
further; and if you try to push it, the result is helpless confusion, reason itself 
becomes unreasonable. Logic becomes argument in a circle. Take, for instance, 
the very basis of our perception, matter and force. What is matter? That which is 
acted upon by force. And force? That which acts upon matter. You see the 
complication, what the logicians call see-saw, one idea depending on the other, 
and this again depending on that. You find a mighty barrier before reason, 
beyond which reasoning cannot go; yet it always feels impatient to get into the 
region of the Infinite beyond. This world, this universe which our senses feel, or 
our mind thinks, is but one atom, so to say, of the Infinite, projected on to the 
plane of consciousness; and within that narrow limit, defined by the network of 


consciousness, works our reason, and not beyond. Therefore, there must be 
some other instrument to take us beyond, and that instrument is called 
inspiration. So instinct, reason, and inspiration are the three instruments of 
knowledge. Instinct belongs to animals, reason to man, and inspiration to God- 
men. But in all human beings are to be found, in a more or less developed 
condition, the germs of all these three instruments of knowledge. To have these 
mental instruments evolved, the germs must be there. And this must also be 
remembered that one instrument is a development of the other, and therefore 
does not contradict it. It is reason that develops into inspiration, and therefore 
inspiration does not contradict reason, but fulfils it. Things which reason cannot 
get at are brought to light by inspiration; and they do not contradict reason. The 
old man does not contradict the child, but fulfils the child. Therefore you must 
always bear in mind that the great danger lies in mistaking the lower form of 
instrument to be the higher. Many times instinct is presented before the world as 
inspiration, and then come all the spurious claims for the gift of prophecy. A 
fool or a semi-lunatic thinks that the confusion going on in his brain is 
inspiration, and he wants men to follow him. The most contradictory irrational 
nonsense that has been preached in the world is simply the instinctive jargon of 
confused lunatic brains trying to pass for the language of inspiration. 

The first test of true teaching must be, that the teaching should not contradict 
reason. And you may see that such is the basis of all these Yogas. We take the 
Raj a-Yoga, the psychological Yoga, the psychological way to union. It is a vast 
subject, and I can only point out to you now the central idea of this Yoga. We 
have but one method of acquiring knowledge. From the lowest man to the 
highest Yogi, all have to use the same method; and that method is what is called 
concentration. The chemist who works in his laboratory concentrates all the 
powers of his mind, brings them into one focus, and throws them on the 
elements; and the elements stand analysed, and thus his knowledge comes. The 
astronomer has also concentrated the powers of his mind and brought them into 
one focus; and he throws them on to objects through his telescope; and stars and 
systems roll forward and give up their secrets to him. So it is in every case — 
with the professor in his chair, the student with his book — with every man who 
is working to know. You are hearing me, and if my words interest you, your 
mind will become concentrated on them; and then suppose a clock strikes, you 
will not hear it, on account of this concentration; and the more you are able to 


concentrate your mind, the better you will understand me; and the more I 
concentrate my love and powers, the better I shall be able to give expression to 
what I want to convey to you. The more this power of concentration, the more 
knowledge is acquired, because this is the one and only method of acquiring 
knowledge. Even the lowest shoeblack, if he gives more concentration, will 
black shoes better; the cook with concentration will cook a meal all the better. 

In making money, or in worshipping God, or in doing anything, the stronger the 
power of concentration, the better will that thing be done. This is the one call, 
the one knock, which opens the gates of nature, and lets out floods of light. 

This, the power of concentration, is the only key to the treasure-house of 
knowledge. The system of Raja-Yoga deals almost exclusively with this. In the 
present state of our body we are so much distracted, and the mind is frittering 
away its energies upon a hundred sorts of things. As soon as I try to calm my 
thoughts and concentrate my mind upon any one object of knowledge, 
thousands of undesired impulses rush into the brain, thousands of thoughts rush 
into the mind and disturb it. How to check it and bring the mind under control is 
the whole subject of study in Raj a-Yoga. 

Now take Karma-Yoga, the attainment of God through work. It is evident that in 
society there are many persons who seem to be born for some sort of activity or 
other, whose minds cannot be concentrated on the plane of thought alone, and 
who have but one idea, concretised in work, visible and tangible. There must be 
a science for this kind of life too. Each one of us is engaged in some work, but 
the majority of us fritter away the greater portion of our energies, because we do 
not know the secret of work. Karma-Yoga explains this secret and teaches 
where and how to work, how to employ to the greatest advantage the largest 
part of our energies in the work that is before us. But with this secret we must 
take into consideration the great objection against work, namely that it causes 
pain. All misery and pain come from attachment. I want to do work, I want to 
do good to a human being; and it is ninety to one that that human being whom I 
have helped will prove ungrateful and go against me; and the result to me is 
pain. Such things deter mankind from working; and it spoils a good portion of 
the work and energy of mankind, this fear of pain and misery. Karma-Yoga 
teaches us how to work for work's sake, unattached, without caring who is 
helped, and what for. The Karma-Yogi works because it is his nature, because 
hQ feels that it is good for him to do so, and he has no object beyond that. His 


position in this world is that of a giver, and he never cares to receive anything. 
He knows that he is giving, and does not ask for anything in return and, 
therefore, he eludes the grasp of misery. The grasp of pain, whenever it comes, 
is the result of the reaction of "attachment". 

There is then the Bhakti-Yoga for the man of emotional nature, the lover. He 
wants to love God, he relies upon and uses all sorts of rituals, flowers, incense, 
beautiful buildings, forms and all such things. Do you mean to say they are 
wrong? One fact I must tell you. It is good for you to remember, in this country 
especially, that the world's great spiritual giants have all been produced only by 
those religious sects which have been in possession of very rich mythology and 
ritual. All sects that have attempted to worship God without any form or 
ceremony have crushed without mercy everything that is beautiful and sublime 
in religion. Their religion is a fanaticism at best, a dry thing. The history of the 
world is a standing witness to this fact. Therefore do not decry these rituals and 
mythologies. Let people have them; let those who so desire have them. Do not 
exhibit that unworthy derisive smile, and say, "They are fools; let them have it." 
Not so; the greatest men I have seen in my life, the most wonderfully developed 
in spirituality, have all come through the discipline of these rituals. I do not hold 
myself worthy to sit at their feet, and for me to criticise theml How do I know 
how these ideas act upon the human minds which of them I am to accept and 
which to reject? We are apt to criticise everything in the world: without 
sufficient warrant. Let people have all the mythology they want, with its 
beautiful inspirations; for you must always bear in mind that emotional natures 
do not care for abstract definitions of the truth. God to them is something 
tangible, the only thing that is real; they feel, hear, and see Him, and love Him. 
Let them have their God. Your rationalist seems to them to be like the fool who, 
when he saw a beautiful statue, wanted to break it to find out of what material it 
was made. Bhakti-Yoga: teaches them how to love, without any ulterior 
motives, loving God and loving the good because it is good to do so, not for 
going to heaven, nor to get children, wealth, or anything else. It teaches them 
that love itself is the highest recompense of love — that God Himself is love. It 
teaches them to pay all kinds of tribute to God as the Creator, the Omnipresent, 
Omniscient, Almighty Ruler, the Father and the Mother. The highest phrase that 
can express Him, the highest idea that the human mind can conceive of Him, is 
that He is the God of Love. Wherever there is love, it is He. "Wherever there is 


any love, it is He, the Lord is present there." Where the husband kisses the wife. 
He is there in the kiss; where the mother kisses the child. He is there in the kiss; 
where friends clasp hands. He, the Lord, is present as the God of Love. When a 
great man loves and wishes to help mankind. He is there giving freely His 
bounty out of His love to mankind. Wherever the heart expands. He is there 
manifested. This is what the Bhakti-Yoga teaches. 

We lastly come to the Jnana-Yogi, the philosopher, the thinker, he who wants to 
go beyond the visible. He is the man who is not satisfied with the little things of 
this world. His idea is to go beyond the daily routine of eating, drinking, and so 
on; not even the teaching of thousands of books will satisfy him. Not even all 
the sciences will satisfy him; at the best, they only bring this little world before 
him. What else will give him satisfaction? Not even myriads of systems of 
worlds will satisfy him; they are to him but a drop in the ocean of existence. His 
soul wants to go beyond all that into the very heart of being, by seeing Reality 
as It is; by realising It, by being It, by becoming one with that Universal Being. 
That is the philosopher. To say that God is the Father or the Mother, the Creator 
of this universe, its Protector and Guide, is to him quite inadequate to express 
Him. To him, God is the life of his life, the soul of his soul. God is his own Self. 
Nothing else remains which is other than God. All the mortal parts of him 
become pounded by the weighty strokes of philosophy and are brushed away. 
What at last truly remains is God Himself. 

Upon the same tree there are two birds, one on the top, the other below. The one 
on the top is calm, silent, and majestic, immersed in his own glory; the one on 
the lower branches, eating sweet and bitter fruits by turns, hopping from branch 
to branch, is becoming happy and miserable by turns. After a time the lower 
bird eats an exceptionally bitter fruit and gets disgustful and looks up and sees 
the other bird, that wondrous one of golden plumage, who eats neither sweet nor 
bitter fruit, who is neither happy nor miserable, but calm. Self-centred, and sees 
nothing beyond his Self. The lower bird longs for this condition but soon forgets 
it, and again begins to eat the fruits. In a little while, he eats another 
exceptionally bitter fruit, which makes him feel miserable, and he again looks 
up, and tries to get nearer to the upper bird. Once more he forgets and after a 
time he looks up, and so on he goes again and again, until he comes very near to 
the beautiful bird and sees the reflection of light from his plumage playing 


around his own body, and he feels a change and seems to melt away; still nearer 
he comes, and everything about him melts away, and at last he understands this 
wonderful change. The lower bird was, as it were, only the substantial-looking 
shadow, the reflection of the higher; he himself was in essence the upper bird all 
the time. This eating of fruits, sweet and bitter, this lower, little bird, weeping 
and happy by turns, was a vain chimera, a dream: all along, the real bird was 
there above, calm and silent, glorious and majestic, beyond grief, beyond 
sorrow. The upper bird is God, the Lord of this universe; and the lower bird is 
the human soul, eating the sweet and bitter fruits of this world. Now and then 
comes a heavy blow to the soul. For a time, he stops the eating and goes 
towards the unknown God, and a flood of light comes. He thinks that this world 
is a vain show. Yet again the senses drag hint down, and he begins as before to 
eat the sweet and bitter fruits of the world. Again an exceptionally hard blow 
comes. His heart becomes open again to divine light; thus gradually he 
approaches God, and as he gets nearer and nearer, he finds his old self melting 
away. When he has come near enough, he sees that he is no other than God, and 
he exclaims, "He whom I have described to you as the Life of this universe, as 
present in the atom, and in suns and moons — He is the basis of our own life, 
the Soul of our soul. Nay, thou art That." This is what this Jnana-Yoga teaches. 
It tells man that he is essentially divine. It shows to mankind the real unity of 
being, and that each one of us is the Lord God Himself, manifested on earth. All 
of us, from the lowest worm that crawls under our feet to the highest beings to 
whom we look up with wonder and awe — all are manifestations of the same 
Lord. 

Lastly, it is imperative that all these various Yogas should be carried out in, 
practice; mere theories about them will not do any good. First we have to hear 
about them, then we have to think about them. We have to reason the thoughts 
out, impress them on our minds, and we have to meditate on them, realise them, 
until at last they become our whole life. No longer will religion remain a bundle 
of ideas or theories, nor an intellectual assent; it will enter into our very self. By 
means of intellectual assent we may today subscribe to many foolish things, and 
change our minds altogether tomorrow. But true religion never changes. 
Religion is realisation; not talk, nor doctrine, nor theories, however beautiful 
they may be. It is being and becoming, not hearing or acknowledging; it is the 
whole soul becoming changed into what it believes. That is religion. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


THE OPEN SECRET 

{Delivered at Los Angeles, Calif., 5th January 1900) 

Whichever way we turn in trying to understand things in their reality, if we 
analyse far enough, we find that at last we come to a peculiar state of things, 
seemingly a contradiction: something which our reason cannot grasp and yet is 
a fact. We take up something — we know it is finite; but as soon as we begin to 
analyse it, it leads us beyond our reason, and we never find an end to all its 
qualities, its possibilities, its powers, its relations. It has become infinite. Take 
even a common flower, that is finite enough; but who is there that can say he 
knows all about the flower? There is no possibility of anyone's getting to the 
end of the knowledge about that one flower. The flower has become infinite — 
the flower which was finite to begin with. Take a grain of sand. Analyse it. We 
start with the assumption that it is finite, and at last we find that it is not, it is 
infinite; all the same, we have looked upon it as finite. The flower is similarly 
treated as a finite something. 

So with all our thoughts and experiences, physical and mental. We begin, we 
may think, on a small scale, and grasp them as little things; but very soon they 
elude our knowledge and plunge into the abyss of the infinite. And the greatest 
and the first thing perceived is ourselves. We are also in the same dilemma 
about existence. We exist. We see we are finite beings. We live and die. Our 
horizon is narrow. We are here, limited, confronted by the universe all around. 
Nature can crush us out of existence in a moment. Our little bodies are just held 
together, ready to go to pieces at a moment's notice. We know that. In the 
region of action how powerless we are! Our will is being thwarted at every 
turn. So many things we want to do, and how few we can do! There is no limit 
to our willing. We can will everything, want everything, we can desire to go to 
the dogstar. But how few of our desires can be accomplished! The body will 
not allow it. Well, nature is against the accomplishment of our will. We are 
weak. What is true of the flower, of the grain of sand, of the physical world, 
and of every thought, is a hundredfold more true of ourselves. We are also in 
the same dilemma of existence, being finite and infinite at the same time. We 
are like waves in the ocean; the wave is the ocean and yet not the ocean. There 






is not any part of the wave of which you cannot say, "It is the ocean." The 
name "ocean" applies to the wave and equally to every other part of the ocean, 
and yet it is separate from the ocean. So in this infinite ocean of existence we 
are like wavelets. At the same time, when we want really to grasp ourselves, 
we cannot — we have become the infinite. 

We seem to be walking in dreams. Dreams are all right in a dream-mind; but as 
soon as you want to grasp one of them, it is gone. Why? Not that it was false, 
but because it is beyond the power of reason, the power of the intellect to 
comprehend it. Everything in this life is so vast that the intellect is nothing in 
comparison with it. It refuses to be bound by the laws of the intellect! It laughs 
at the bondage the intellect wants to spread around it. And a thousandfold more 
so is this the case with the human soul. "We ourselves" — this is the greatest 
mystery of the universe. 

How wonderful it all is! Look at the human eye. How easily it can be 
destroyed, and yet the biggest suns exist only because your eyes see them. The 
world exists because your eyes certify that it exists. Think of that mystery! 
These poor little eyes! A strong light, or a pin, can destroy them. Yet the most 
powerful engines of destruction, the most powerful cataclysms, the most 
wonderful of existences, millions of suns and stars and moons and earth — all 
depend for their existence upon, and have to be certified by, these two little 
things! They say, "Nature, you exist", and we believe nature exists. So with all 
our senses. 

What is this? Where is weakness? Who is strong? What is great and what is 
small? What is high and what is low in this marvellous interdependence of 
existence where the smallest atom is necessary for the existence of the whole? 
Who is great and who is small? It is past finding out! And why? Because none 
is great and none is small. All things are interpenetrated by that infinite ocean; 
their reality is that infinite; and whatever there is on the surface is but that 
infinite. The tree is infinite; so is everything that you see or feel — every grain 
of sand, every thought, every soul, everything that exists, is infinite. Infinite is 
finite and finite infinite. This is our existence. 

Now, that may be all true, but all this feeling after the Infinite is at present 






mostly unconscious. It is not that we have forgotten that infinite nature of ours: 
none can ever do that. Who can ever think that he can be annihilated? Who can 
think that he will die? None can. All our relation to the Infinite works in us 
unconsciously. In a manner, therefore, we forget our real being, and hence all 
this misery comes. 

In practical daily life we are hurt by small things; we are enslaved by little 
beings. Misery comes because we think we are finite — we are little beings. 
And yet, how difficult it is to believe that we are infinite beings! In the midst of 
all this misery and trouble, when a little thing may throw me off my balance, it 
must be my care to believe that I am infinite. And the fact is that we are, and 
that consciously or unconsciously we are all searching after that something 
which is infinite; we are always seeking for something that is free. 

There was never a human race which did not have a religion and worship some 
sort of God or gods. Whether the God or gods existed or not is no question; but 
what is the analysis of this psychological phenomenon? Why is all the world 
trying to find, or seeking for, a God? Why? Because in spite of all this 
bondage, in spite of nature and this tremendous energy of law grinding us 
down, never allowing us to turn to any side — wherever we go, whatever we 
want to do, we are thwarted by this law, which is everywhere — in spite of all 
this, the human soul never forgets its freedom and is ever seeking it. The search 
for freedom is the search of all religions; whether they know it or not, whether 
they can formulate it well or ill, the idea is there. Even the lowest man, the 
most ignorant, seeks for something which has power over nature's laws. He 
wants to see a demon, a ghost, a god — somebody who can subdue nature, for 
whom nature is not almighty, for whom there is no law. "Oh, for somebody 
who can break the law!" That is the cry coming from the human heart. We are 
always seeking for someone who breaks the law. The rushing engine speeds 
along the railway track; the little worm crawls out of its way. We at once say, 
"The engine is dead matter, a machine; and the worm is alive," because the 
worm attempted to break the law. The engine, with all its power and might, can 
never break the law. It is made to go in any direction man wants, and it cannot 
do otherwise; but the worm, small and little though it was, attempted to break 
the law and avoid the danger. It tried to assert itself against law, assert its 
freedom; and there was the sign of the future God in it. 





Everywhere we see this assertion of freedom, this freedom of the soul. It is 
reflected in every religion in the shape of God or gods; but it is all external yet 
— for those who only see the gods outside. Man decided that he was nothing. 
He was afraid that he could never be free; so he went to seek for someone 
outside of nature who was free. Then he thought that there were many and 
many such free beings, and gradually he merged them all into one God of gods 
and Lord of lords. Even that did not satisfy him. He came a little closer to truth, 
a little nearer; and then gradually found that whatever he was, he was in some 
way connected with the God of gods and Lord of lords; that he, though he 
thought himself bound and low and weak, was somehow connected with that 
God of gods. Then visions came to him; thought arose and knowledge 
advanced. And he began to come nearer and nearer to that God, and at last 
found out that God and all the gods, this whole psychological phenomenon 
connected with the search for an all-powerful free soul, was but a reflection of 
his own idea of himself. And then at last he discovered that it was not only true 
that "God made man after His own image", but that it was also true that man 
made God after his own image. That brought out the idea of divine freedom. 
The Divine Being was always within, the nearest of the near. Him we had ever 
been seeking outside, and at last found that He is in the heart of our hearts. You 
may know the story of the man who mistook his own heartbeat for somebody 
knocking at the door, and went to the door and opened it, but found nobody 
there, so he went back. Again he seemed to hear a knocking at the door, but 
nobody was there. Then he understood that it was his own heartbeat, and he 
had misinterpreted it as a knocking at the door. Similarly, man after his search 
finds out that this infinite freedom that he was placing in imagination all the 
time in the nature outside is the internal subject, the eternal Soul of souls; this 
Reality, he himself. 

Thus at last he comes to recognise this marvellous duality of existence: the 
subject, infinite and finite in one — the Infinite Being is also the same finite 
soul. The Infinite is caught, as it were, in the meshes of the intellect and 
apparently manifests as finite beings, but the reality remains unchanged. 

This is, therefore, true knowledge: that the Soul of our souls, the Reality that is 
within us, is That which is unchangeable, eternal, ever-blessed, ever-free. This 




is the only solid ground for us to stand upon. 

This, then, is the end of all death, the advent of all innnortality, the end of all 
misery. And he who sees that One among the many, that One unchangeable in 
the universe of change, he who sees Him as the Soul of his soul, unto him 
belongs eternal peace — unto none else. 

And in the midst of the depths of misery and degradation, the Soul sends a ray 
of light, and man wakes up and finds that what is really his, he can never lose. 
No, we can never lose what is really ours. Who can lose his being? Who can 
lose his very existence? If I am good, it is the existence first, and then that 
becomes coloured with the quality of goodness. If I am evil, it is the existence 
first, and that becomes coloured with the quality of badness. That existence is 
first, last, and always; it is never lost, but ever present. 

Therefore, there is hope for all. None can die; none can be degraded for ever. 
Life is but a playground, however gross the play may be. However we may 
receive blows, and however knocked about we may be, the Soul is there and is 
never injured. We are that Infinite. 

Thus sang a Vedantin, "I never had fear nor doubt. Death never came to me. I 
never had father or mother: for I was never born. Where are my foes? — for I 
am All. I am the Existence and Knowledge and Bliss Absolute. I am It. I am It. 
Anger and lust and jealousy, evil thoughts and all these things, never came to 
me; for I am the Existence, the Knowledge, the Bliss Absolute. I am It. I am 
It." 

That is the remedy for all disease, the nectar that cures death. Here we are in 
this world, and our nature rebels against it. But let us repeat, "I am It; I am It. I 
have no fear, nor doubt, nor death. I have no sex, nor creed, nor colour. What 
creed can I have? What sect is there to which I should belong? What sect can 
hold me? I am in every sect!" 

However much the body rebels, however much the mind rebels, in the midst of 
the uttermost darkness, in the midst of agonising tortures, in the uttermost 
despair, repeat this, once, twice, thrice, ever more. Light comes gently, slowly, 
but surely it comes. 



Many times I have been in the jaws of death, starving, footsore, and weary; for 
days and days I had had no food, and often could walk no farther; I would sink 
down under a tree, and life would seem ebbing away. I could not speak, I could 
scarcely think, but at last the mind reverted to the idea: "I have no fear nor 
death; I never hunger nor thirst. I am It! I am It! The whole of nature cannot 
crush me; it is my servant. Assert thy strength, thou Lord of lords and God of 
gods! Regain thy lost empire! Arise and walk and stop not!" And I would rise 
up, reinvigorated, and here am I, living, today. Thus, whenever darkness 
comes, assert the reality and everything adverse must vanish. For, after all, it is 
but a dream. Mountain-high though the difficulties appear, terrible and gloomy 
though all things seem, they are but Maya. Fear not — it is banished. Crush it, 
and it vanishes. Stamp upon it, and it dies. Be not afraid. Think not how many 
times you fail. Never mind. Time is infinite. Go forward: assert yourself again 
and again, and light must come. You may pray to everyone that was ever born, 
but who will come to help you? And what of the way of death from which none 
knows escape? Help thyself out by thyself. None else can help thee, friend. For 
thou alone art thy greatest enemy, thou alone art thy greatest friend. Get hold of 
the Self, then. Stand up. Don't be afraid. In the midst of all miseries and all 
weakness, let the Self come out, faint and imperceptible though it be at first. 
You will gain courage, and at last like a lion you will roar out, "I am It! I am 
It!" "I am neither a man, nor a woman, nor a god, nor a demon; no, nor any of 
the animals, plants, or trees. I am neither poor nor rich, neither learned nor 
ignorant. All these things are very little compared with what I am: for I am It! I 
am It! Behold the sun and the moon and the stars: I am the light that is shining 
in them! I am the beauty of the fire! I am the power in the universe! For, I am 
It! I am It! 

"Whoever thinks that I am little makes a mistake, for the Self is all that exists. 
The sun exists because I declare it does, the world exists because I declare it 
does. Without me they cannot remain, for I am Existence, Knowledge, and 
Bliss Absolute — ever happy, ever pure, ever beautiful. Behold, the sun is the 
cause of our vision, but is not itself ever affected by any defect in the eyes of 
any one; even so I am. I am working through all organs, working through 
everything, but never does the good and evil of work attach to me. For me there 
is no law, nor Karma. I own the laws of Karma. I ever was and ever am. 



"My real pleasure was never in earthly things — in husband, wife, children, 
and other things. For I am like the infinite blue sky: clouds of many colours 
pass over it and play for a second; they move off, and there is the same 
unchangeable blue. Happiness and misery, good and evil, may envelop me for 
a moment, veiling the Self; but I am still there. They pass away because they 
are changeable. I shine, because I am unchangeable. If misery comes, I know it 
is finite, therefore it must die. If evil comes, I know it is finite, it must go. I 
alone am infinite and untouched by anything. For I am the Infinite, that Eternal, 
Changeless Self." — So sings one of our poets. 

Let us drink of this cup, this cup that leads to everything that is immortal, 
everything that is unchangeable. Fear not. Believe not that we are evil, that we 
are finite,, that we can ever die. It is not true. 

"This is to be heard of, then to be thought upon, and then to be meditated 
upon." When the hands work,, the mind should repeat, "I am It. I am It." Think 
of it, dream of it, until it becomes bone of your bones and; flesh of your flesh, 
until all the hideous dreams of littleness, of weakness, of misery, and of evil, 
have entirely vanished, and no more then can the Truth be hidden from you 
even for a moment. 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


THE WAY TO BLESSEDNESS 

I shall tell you a story from the Vedas tonight. The Vedas are the sacred 
scriptures of the Hindus and are a vast collection of literature, of which the last 
part is called the Vedanta, meaning the end of the Vedas. It deals with the 
theories contained in them, and more especially the philosophy with which we 
are concerned. It is written in archaic Sanskrit, and you must remember it was 
written thousands of years ago. There was a certain man who wanted to make a 
big sacrifice. In the religion of the Hindus, sacrifice plays a great part. There 
are various sorts of sacrifices. They make altars and pour oblations into the fire, 
and repeat various hymns and so forth; and at the end of the sacrifice they 
make a gift to the Brahmins and the poor. Each sacrifice has its peculiar gift. 
There was one sacrifice, where everything a man possessed had to be given up. 
Now this man, though rich, was miserly, and at the same time wanted to get a 
great name for having done this most difficult sacrifice. And when he did this 
sacrifice, instead of giving up everything he had, he gave away only his blind, 
lame, and old cows that would never more give milk. But he had a son called 
Nachiketas, a bright young boy, who, observing the poor gifts made by his 
father, and pondering on the demerit that was sure to accrue to him thereby, 
resolved to make amends for them by making a gift of himself. So he went to 
his father and said, "And to whom will you give me?" The father did not 
answer the boy, and the boy asked a second and a third time, when the father 
got vexed and said, "Thee I give unto Yama, thee I give unto Death." And the 
boy went straight to the kingdom of Yama. Yama was not at home, so he 
waited there. After three days Yama came and said to him, "O Brahmin, thou 
art my guest, and thou hast been here for three days without any food. I salute 
thee, and in order to repay thee for this trouble, I will grant thee three boons." 
Then the boy asked the first boon, "May my father's anger against me get 
calmed down," and the second boon was that he wanted to know about a 
certain sacrifice. And then came the third boon. "When a man dies, the 
question arises: What becomes of him: Some people say he ceases to exist. 
Others say that he exists. Please tell me what the answer is. This is the third 
boon that I want." Then Death answered, "The gods in ancient times tried to 
unravel the mystery; this mystery is so fine that it is hard to know. Ask for 






some other boon: do not ask this one. Ask for a long life of a hundred years. 
Ask for cattle and horses, ask for great kingdoms. Do not press me to answer 
this. Whatever man desires for his enjoyment, ask all that and I will fulfil it, but 
do not want to know this secret." "No sir," said the boy, "man is not to be 
satisfied with wealth; if wealth were wanted, we should get it, if we have only 
seen you. We shall also live so long as you rule. What decaying mortal, living 
in the world below and possessed of knowledge, having gained the company of 
the undecaying and the immortal, will delight in long life, knowing the nature 
of the pleasure produced by song and sport? Therefore, tell me this secret about 
the great hereafter, I do not want anything else; that is what Nachiketas wants, 
the mystery of death." Then the God of death was pleased. We have been 
saying in the last two or three lectures that this Jnana prepares the mind. So you 
see here that the first preparation is that a man must desire nothing else but the 
truth, and truth for truth's sake. See how this boy rejected all these gifts which 
Death offered him; possessions, property, wealth, long life, and everything he 
was ready to sacrifice for this one idea, knowledge only, the truth. Thus alone 
can truth come. The God of death became pleased. "Here are two ways," he 
said, "one of enjoyment, the other of blessedness. These two in various ways 
draw mankind. He becomes a sage who, of these two, takes up that which leads 
to blessedness, and he degenerates who takes up the road to enjoyment. I praise 
you, Nachiketas; you have not asked for desire. In various ways I tempted you 
towards the path of enjoyment; you resisted them all, you have known that 
knowledge is much higher than a life of enjoyment. 

"You have understood that the man who lives in ignorance and enjoys, is not 
different from the brute beast. Yet there are many who, though steeped in 
ignorance, in the pride of their hearts, think that they are great sages and go 
round and round in many crooked ways, like the blind led by the blind. This 
truth, Nachiketas, never shines in the heart of those who are like ignorant 
children, deluded by a few lumps of earth. They do not understand this world, 
nor the other world. They deny this and the other one, and thus again and again 
come under my control. Many have not even the opportunity to hear about it; 
and many, though hearing, cannot know it, because the teacher must be 
wonderful; so must he be wonderful too unto whom the knowledge is carried. 

If the speaker is a man who is not highly advanced, then even a hundred times 
heard, and a hundred times taught, the truth never illumines the soul. Do not 


disturb your mind by vain arguments, Nachiketas; this truth only becomes 
effulgent in the heart which has been made pure. He who cannot be seen 
without the greatest difficulty, He who is hidden. He who has entered the cave 
of the heart of hearts — the Ancient One — cannot be seen with the external 
eyes; seeing Him with the eyes of the soul, one gives up both pleasure and 
pain. He who knows this secret gives up all his vain desires, and attains this 
superfine perception, and thus becomes ever blessed. Nachiketas, that is the 
way to blessedness. He is beyond all virtue, beyond all vice, beyond all duties, 
beyond all non-duties, beyond all existence, beyond all that is to be; he who 
knows this, alone knows. He whom all the Vedas seek, to see whom men 
undergo all sorts of asceticism, I will tell you His name: It is Om. This eternal 
Om is the Brahman, this is the immortal One; he who knows the secret of this 
— whatever he desires is his. This Self of man, Nachiketas, about which you 
seek to know, is never born, and never dies. Without beginning, ever existing, 
this Ancient One is not destroyed, when the body is destroyed. If the slayer 
thinks that he can slay, and if the slain man thinks he is slain, both are 
mistaken, for neither can the Self kill, nor can It be killed. Infinitely smaller 
than the smallest particle, infinitely greater than the greatest existence, the Lord 
of all lives in the cave of the heart of every being. He who has become sinless 
sees Him in all His glory, through the mercy of the same Lord. (We find that 
the mercy of God is one of the causes of God-realisation.) Sitting He goes far, 
lying He goes everywhere; who else but men of purified and subtle 
understanding are qualified to know the God in whom all conflicting attributes 
meet? Without body, yet living in the body, untouched, yet seemingly in 

A. 

contact, omnipresent — knowing the Atman to be such, the sage gives up all 
misery. This Atman is not to be attained by the study of the Vedas, nor by the 
highest intellect, nor by much learning. Whom the Atman seeks, he gets the 
Atman; unto him He discloses His glory. He who is continuously doing evil 
deeds, he whose mind is not calm, he who cannot meditates he who is always 
disturbed and fickle — he cannot understand and realise this Atman who has 
entered the cave of the heart. This body, O Nachiketas, is the chariot, the 
organs of the senses are the horses, the mind is the reins, the intellect is the 
charioteer, and the soul is the rider in the chariot. When the soul joins himself 
with the charioteer, Buddhi or intellect, and then through it with the mind, the 
reins, and through it again with the organs, the horses, he is said to be the 
enjoyer; he perceives, he works, he acts. He whose mind is not under control. 




and who has no discrimination, his senses are not controllable like vicious 
horses in the hands of a driver. But he who has discrimination, whose mind is 
controlled, his organs are always controllable like good horses in the hands of a 
driver. He who has discrimination, whose mind is always in the way to 
understand truth, who is always pure — he receives that truth, attaining which 
there is no rebirth. This, O Nachiketas, is very difficult, the way is long, and it 
is hard to attain. It is only those who have attained the finest perception that can 
see it, that can understand it. Yet do not be frightened. Awake, be up and doing. 
Do not stop till you have reached the goal. For the sages say that the task is 
very difficult, like walking on the edge of a razor. He who is beyond the senses, 
beyond all touch, beyond all form, beyond all taste, the Unchangeable, the 
Infinite, beyond even intelligence, the Indestructible — knowing Him alone, 
we are safe from the jaws of death." 

So far, we see that Yama describes the goal that is to be attained. The first idea 
that we get is that birth, death, misery, and the various tossings about to which 
we are subject in the world can only be overcome by knowing that which is 
real. What is real? That which never changes, the Self of man, the Self behind 
the universe. Then, again, it is said that it is very difficult to know Him. 
Knowing does not mean simply intellectual assent, it means realisation. Again 
and again we have read that this Self is to be seen, to be perceived. We cannot 
see it with the eyes; the perception for it has to become superfine. It is gross 
perception by which the walls and books are perceived, but the perception to 
discern the truth has to be made very fine, and that is the whole secret of this 
knowledge. Then Yama says that one must be very pure. That is the way to 
making the perception superfine; and then he goes on to tell us other ways. 

That self-existent One is far removed from the organs. The organs or 
instruments see outwards, but the self-existing One, the Self, is seen inwards. 
You must remember the qualification that is required: the desire to know this 
Self by turning the eyes inwards. All these beautiful things that we see in 
nature are very good, but that is not the way to see God. We must learn how to 
turn the eyes inwards. The eagerness of the eyes to see outwards should be 
restricted. When you walk in a busy street, it is difficult to hear the man speak 
with whom you are walking, because of the noise of the passing carriages. He 
cannot hear you because there is so much noise. The mind is going outwards, 
and you cannot hear the man who is next to you. In the same way, this world 



around us is making such a noise that it draws the mind outwards. How can we 
see the Self? This going outwards must be stopped. That is what is meant by 
turning the eyes inwards, and then alone the glory of the Lord within will be 
seen. 

What is this Self? We have seen that It is even beyond the intellect. We learn 
from the same Upanishad that this Self is eternal and omnipresent, that you and 
I and all of us are omnipresent beings, and that the Self is changeless. Now this 
omnipresent Being can be only one. There cannot be two beings who are 
equally omnipresent — how could that be? There cannot be two beings who 
are infinite, and the result is, there is really only one Self, and you, I, and the 
whole universe are but one, appearing as many. "As the one fire entering into 
the world manifests itself in various ways, even so that one Self, the Self of all, 
manifests Itself in every form." But the question is: If this Self is perfect and 
pure, and the One Being of the universe, what becomes of It when It goes into 
the impure body, the wicked body, the good body, and so on? How can It 
remain perfect? "The one sun is the cause of vision in every eye, yet it is not 
touched by the defects in the eyes of any." If a man has jaundice he sees 
everything as yellow; the cause of his vision is the sun, but his seeing 
everything as yellow does not touch the sun. Even so this One Being, though 
the Self of every one, is not touched by the purities or impurities outside. "In 
this world where everything is evanescent, he who knows Him who never 
changes, in this world of insentience, he who knows the one sentient Being, in 
this world of many, he who knows this One and sees Him in his own soul, unto 
him belongs eternal bliss, to none else, to none else. There the sun shines not, 
nor the stars, nor the lightning flashes, what to speak of fire? He shining, 
everything shines; through His light everything becomes effulgent. When all 
the desires that trouble the heart cease, then the mortal becomes immortal, and 
here one attains Brahman. When all the crookedness of the heart disappears, 
when all its knots are cut asunder, then alone the mortal becomes immortal. 
This is the way. May this study bless us; may it maintain us; may it give us 
strength, may it become energy in us; may we not hate each other; peace unto 
all!" 

This is the line of thought that you will find in the Vedanta philosophy. We see 
first that here is a thought entirely different from what you see anywhere else in 



the world. In the oldest parts of the Vedas the search was the same as in other 
books, the search was outside. In some of the old, old books, the question was 
raised, "What was in the beginning? When there was neither aught nor naught, 
when darkness was covering darkness, who created all this?" So the search 
began. And they began to talk about the angels, the Devas, and all sorts of 
things, and later on we find that they gave it up as hopeless. In their day the 
search was outside and they could find nothing; but in later days, as we read in 
the Vedas, they had to look inside for the self-existent One. This Is the one 
fundamental idea in the Vedas, that our search in the stars, the nebulae, the 
Milky Way, in the whole of this external universe leads to nothing, never 
solves the problem of life and death. The wonderful mechanism inside had to 
be analysed, and it revealed to them the secret of the universe; nor star or sun 
could do it. Man had to be anatomised; not the body, but the soul of man. In 
that soul they found the answer. What was the answer they found? That behind 
the body, behind even the mind, there is the self-existent One. He dies not, nor 
is He born. The self-existent One it omnipresent, because He has no form. That 
which has no form or shape, that which is not limited by space or time, cannot 
live in a certain place. How can it? It is everywhere, omnipresent, equally 
present through all of us. 

What is the soul of man? There was one party who held that there is a Being, 
God, and an infinite number of souls besides, who are eternally separate from 
God in essence, and form, and everything. This is dualism. This is the old, old 
crude idea. The answer given by another party was that the soul was a part of 
the infinite Divine Existence. Just as this body is a little world by itself, and 
behind it is the mind or thought, and behind that is the individual soul, 
similarly, the whole world is a body, and behind that is the universal mind, and 
behind that is the universal Soul. Just as this body is a portion of the universal 
body, so this mind is a portion of the universal mind, and the soul of man a 
portion of the universal Soul. This is what is called the VishishtMvaita, 
qualified monism. Now, we know that the universal Soul is infinite. How can 
infinity have parts? How can it be broken up, divided? It may be very poetic to 
say that I am a spark of the Infinite, but it is absurd to the thinking mind. What 
is meant by dividing Infinity? Is it something material that you can part or 
separate it into pieces? Infinite can never be divided. If that were possible, it 
would be no more Infinite. What is the conclusion then? The answer is, that 


Soul which is the universal is you; you are not a part but the whole of It. You 
are the whole of God. Then what are all these varieties? We find so many 
millions of individual souls. What are they? If the sun reflects upon millions of 
globules of water, in each globule is the form, the perfect image of the sun; but 
they are only images, and the real sun is only one. So this apparent soul that is 
in every one of us is only the image of God, nothing beyond that. The real 
Being who is behind, is that one God. We are all one there. As Self, there is 
only one in the universe. It is in me and you, and is only one; and that one Self 
has been reflected in all these various bodies as various different selves. But we 
do not know this; we think we are separate from each other and separate from 
Him. And so long as we think this, misery will be in the world. This is 
hallucination. 

Then the other great source of misery is fear. Why does one man injure 
another? Because he fears he will not have enough enjoyment. One man fears 
that, perhaps, he will not have enough money, and that fear causes him to 
injure others and rob them. How can there be fear if there is only one 
existence? If a thunderbolt falls on my head, it was I who was the thunderbolt, 
because I am the only existence. If a plague comes, it is I; if a tiger comes, it is 
I. If death comes, it is 1.1 am both death and life. We see that fear comes with 
the idea that there are two in the universe. We have always heard it preached, 
"Love one another". What for? That doctrine was preached, but the explanation 
is here. Why should I love every one? Because they and I are one. Why should 
I love my brother? Because he and I are one. There is this oneness; this 
solidarity of the whole universe. From the lowest worm that crawls under our 
feet to the highest beings that ever lived — all have various bodies, but are the 
one Soul. Through all mouths, you eat; through all hands, you work; through 
all eyes, you see. You enjoy health in millions of bodies, you are suffering 
from disease in millions of bodies. When this idea comes, and we realise it, see 
it, feel it, then will misery cease, and fear with it. How can I die? There is 
nothing beyond me. Fear ceases, and then alone comes perfect happiness and 
perfect love. That universal sympathy, universal love, universal bliss, that 
never changes, raises man above everything. It has no reactions and no misery 
can touch it; but this little eating and drinking of the world always brings a 
reaction. The whole cause of it is this dualism, the idea that I am separate from 
the universe, separate from God. But as soon as we have realised that "I am He, 


I am the Self of the universe, I am eternally blessed, eternally free" 
come real love, fear will vanish, and all misery cease. 


then will 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


YAJNAVALKYA AND MAITREYI 

We say, "That day is indeed a bad day on which you do not hear the name of 
the Lord, but a cloudy day is not a bad day at all." Yajnavalkya was a great 
sage. You know, the Shastras in India enjoin that every man should give up the 
world when he becomes old. So Yajnavalkya said to his wife, "My beloved, 
here is all my money, and my possessions, and I am going away." She replied, 
"Sir, if I had this whole earth full of wealth, would that give me immortality?" 
Yajnavalkya said, "No, it will not. You will be rich, and that will be all, but 
wealth cannot give us immortality." She replied, "what shall I do to gain that 
through which I shall become immortal? If you know, tell me." Yajnavalkya 
replied, "You have been always my beloved; you are more beloved now by this 
question. Come, take your seat, and I will tell you; and when you have heard, 
meditate upon it." He said, "It is not for the sake of the husband that the wife 

A. 

loves the husband, but for the sake of the Atman that she loves the husband, 
because she loves the Self. None loves the wife for the sake of the wife; but it 
is because one loves the Self that one loves the wife. None loves the children 
for the children; but because one loves the Self, therefore one loves the 
children. None loves wealth on account of the wealth; but because one loves 
the Self, therefore one loves wealth. None loves the Brahmin for the sake of the 
Brahmin; but because one loves the Self, one loves the Brahmin. So, none 
loves the Kshatriya for the sake of the Kshatriya, but because one loves the 
Self. Neither does any one love the world on account of the world, but because 
one loves the Self. None, similarly, loves the gods on account of the gods, but 
because one loves the Self. None loves a thing for that thing's sake; but it is for 
the Self that one loves it. This Self, therefore, is to be heard, reasoned about, 
and meditated upon. O my Maitreyi, when that Self has been heard, when that 
Self has been seen, when that Self has been realised, then, all this becomes 
known." What do we get then? Before us we find a curious philosophy. The 
statement has been made that every love is selfishness in the lowest sense of 
the word: because I love myself, therefore I love another; it cannot be. There 
have been philosophers in modern times who have said that self is the only 
motive power in the world. That is true, and yet it is wrong. But this self is but 
the shadow of that real Self which is behind. It appears wrong and evil because 






it is small. That infinite love for the Self, which is the universe, appears to be 
evil, appears to be small, because it appears through a small part. Even when 
the wife loves the husband, whether she knows it or not, she loves the husband 
for that Self. It is selfishness as it is manifested in the world, but that 
selfishness is really but a small part of that Self-ness. Whenever one loves, one 
has to love in and through the Self. This Self has to be known. What is the 
difference? Those that love the Self without knowing what It is, their love is 
selfishness. Those that love, knowing what that Self is, their love is free; they 
are sages. "Him the Brahmin gives up who sees the Brahmin anywhere else but 
in the Self. Him the Kshatriya gives up who sees the Kshatriya anywhere else 
but in the Self. The world gives him up who sees this world anywhere but in 
that Atman. The gods give him up who loves the gods knowing them to be 
anywhere else but in the Atman. Everything goes away from him who knows 
everything as something else except the Atman. These Brahmins, these 
Kshatriyas, this world, these gods, whatever exists, everything is that Atman". 
Thus he explains what he means by love. 

Every time we particularise an object, we differentiate it from the Self. I am 
trying to love a woman; as soon as that woman is particularised, she is 
separated from the Atman, and my love for her will not be eternal, but will end 
in grief. But as soon as I see that woman as the Atman, that love becomes 
perfect, and will never suffer. So with everything; as soon as you are attached 
to anything in the universe, detaching it from the universe as a whole, from the 
Atman, there comes a reaction. With everything that we love outside the Self, 
grief and misery will be the result. If we enjoy everything in the Self, and as the 
Self, no misery or reaction will come. This is perfect bliss. How to come to this 
ideal? Yajnavalkya goes on to tell us the process by which to reach that state. 
The universe is infinite: how can we take every particular thing and look at it as 
the Atman, without knowing the Atman? "As with a drum when we are at a 
distance we cannot catch the sound, we cannot conquer the sound; but as soon 
as we come to the drum and put our hand on it, the sound is conquered. When 
the conch-shell is being blown, we cannot catch or conquer the sound, until we 
come near and get hold of the shell, and then it is conquered. When the Vina is 
being played, when we have come to the Vina, we get to the centre whence the 
sound is proceeding. As when some one is burning damp fuel, smoke and 
sparks of various kinds come, even so, from this great One has been breathed 


out knowledge; everything has come out of Him. He breathed out, as it were, 
all knowledge. As to all water, the one goal is the ocean; as to all touch, the 
skin is the one centre; as of all smell, the nose is the one centre; as of all taste, 
the tongue is the one goal; as of all form, the eyes are the one goal; as of all 
sounds, the ears are the one goal; as of all thought, the mind is the one goal; as 
of all knowledge, the heart is the one goal; as of all work, the hands are the one 
goal; as a morsel of salt put into the sea-water melts away, and we cannot take 
it back, even so, Maitreyi, is this Universal Being eternally infinite; all 
knowledge is in Him. The whole universe rises from Him, and again goes 
down into Him. No more is there any knowledge, dying, or death." We get the 
idea that we have all come just like sparks from Him, and when you know 
Him, then you go back and become one with Him again. We are the Universal. 

Maitreyi became frightened, just as everywhere people become frightened. 

Said she, "Sir, here is exactly where you have thrown a delusion over me. You 
have frightened me by saying there will be no more gods; all individuality will 
be lost. There will be no one to recognise, no one to love, no one to hate. What 
will become of us?" "Maitreyi, I do not mean to puzzle you, or rather let it rest 
here. You may be frightened. Where there are two, one sees another, one hears 
another, one welcomes another, one thinks of another, one knows another. But 
when the whole has become that Atman, who is seen by whom, who is to be 
heard by whom, who is to be welcomed by whom, who is to be known by 
whom?" That one idea was taken up by Schopenhauer and echoed in his 
philosophy. Through whom we know this universe, through what to know 
Him? How to know the knower? By what means can we know the knower? 
How can that be? Because in and through that we know everything. By what 
means can we know Him? By no means, for He is that means. 

So far the idea is that it is all One Infinite Being. That is the real individuality, 
when there is no more division, and no more parts; these little ideas are very 
low, illusive. But yet in and through every spark of the individuality is shining 
that Infinite. Everything is a manifestation of the Atman. How to reach that? 
First you make the statement, just as Yajnavalkya himself tells us: "This Atman 
is first to be heard of." So he stated the case; then he argued it out, and the last 
demonstration was how to know That, through which all knowledge is 
possible. Then, last, it is to be meditated upon. He takes the contrast, the 


microcosm and the macrocosm, and shows how they are rolling on in particular 
lines, and how it is all beautiful. "This earth is so blissful, so helpful to every 
being; and all beings are so helpful to this earth: all these are manifestations of 
that Self-effulgent One, the Atman." All that is bliss, even in the lowest sense, 
is but the reflection of Him. All that is good is His reflection, and when that 
reflection is a shadow it is called evil. There are no two Gods. When He is less 
manifested, it is called darkness, evil; and when He is more manifested, it is 
called light. That is all. Good and evil are only a question of degree: more 
manifested or less manifested. Just take the example of our own lives. How 
many things we see in our childhood which we think to be good, but which 
really are evil, and how many things seem to be evil which are good! How the 
ideas change! How an idea goes up and up! What we thought very good at one 
time we do not think so good now. So good and evil are but superstitions, and 
do not exist. The difference is only in degree. It is all a manifestation of that 
Atman; He is being manifested in everything; only, when the manifestation is 
very thick we call it evil; and when it is very thin, we call it good. It is the best, 
when all covering goes away. So everything that is in the universe is to be 
meditated upon in that sense alone, that we can see it as all good, because it is 
the best. There is evil and there is good; and the apex, the centre, is the Reality. 
He is neither evil nor good; He is the best. The best can be only one, the good 
can be many and the evil many. There will be degrees of variation between the 
good and the evil, but the best is only one, and that best, when seen through 
thin coverings, we call different sorts of good, and when through thick covers, 
we call evil. Good and evil are different forms of superstition. They have gone 
through all sorts of dualistic delusion and all sorts of ideas, and the words have 
sunk into the hearts of human beings, terrorising men and women and living 
there as terrible tyrants. They make us become tigers. All the hatred with which 
we hate others is caused by these foolish ideas which we have imbibed since 
our childhood — good and evil. Our judgment of humanity becomes entirely 
false; we make this beautiful earth a hell; but as soon as we can give up good 
and evil, it becomes a heaven. 

"This earth is blissful ('sweet' is the literal translation) to all beings and all 
beings are sweet to this earth; they all help each other. And all the sweetness is 
the Atman, that effulgent, immortal One who is inside this earth." Whose is this 
sweetness? How can there be any sweetness but He? That one sweetness is 



manifesting itself in various ways. Wherever there is any love, any sweetness 
in any human being, either in a saint or a sinner, either in an angel or a 
murderer, either in the body, mind, or the senses, it is He. Physical enjoyments 
are but He, mental enjoyments are but He, spiritual enjoyments are but He. 

How can there be anything but He? How can there be twenty thousand gods 
and devils fighting with each other? Childish dreams! Whatever is the lowest 
physical enjoyment is He, and the highest spiritual enjoyment is He. There is 
no sweetness but He. Thus says Yajnavalkya. When you come to that state and 
look upon all things with the same eye, when you see even in the drunkard's 
pleasure in drink only that sweetness, then you have got the truth, and then 
alone you will know what happiness means, what peace means, what love 
means; and so long as toll make these vain distinctions, silly, childish, foolish 
superstitions, all sorts of misery will come. But that immortal One, the 
effulgent One, He is inside the earth, it is all His sweetness, and the same 
sweetness is in the body. This body is the earth, as it were, and inside all the 
powers of the body, all the enjoyments of the body, is He; the eyes see, the skin 
touches; what are all these enjoyments? That Self-effulgent One who is in the 
body. He is the Atman. This world, so sweet to all beings, and every being so 
sweet to it, is but the Self-effulgent; the Immortal is the bliss in that world. In 
us also. He is that bliss. He is the Brahman. "This air is so sweet to all beings, 
and all beings are so sweet to it. But He who is that Self-effulgent Immortal 
Being in the air — is also in this body. He is expressing Himself as the life of 
all beings. This sun is so sweet to all beings. All beings are so sweet to this sun. 
He who is the Self-effulgent Being in the sun, we reflect Him as the smaller 
light. What can be there but His reflection? He is in the body, and it is His 
reflection which makes us see the light. This moon is so sweet to all, and every 
one is so sweet to the moon, but that Self-effulgent and Immortal One who is 
the soul of that moon. He is in us expressing Himself as mind. This lightning is 
so beautiful, every one is so sweet to the lightning, but the Self-effulgent and 
Immortal One is the soul of this lightning, and is also in us, because all is that 
Brahman. The Atman, the Self, is the king of all beings." These ideas are very 
helpful to men; they are for meditation. For instance, meditate on the earth; 
think of the earth and at the same time know that we have That which is in the 
earth, that both are the same. Identify the body with the earth, and identify the 
soul with the Soul behind. Identify the air with the soul that is in the air and 
that is in me. They are all one, manifested in different forms. To realise this 



unity is the end and aim of all meditation, and this is what Yajnavalkya was 
trying to explain to Maitreyi. 

» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


SOUL, NATURE, AND GOD 

According to the Vedanta philosophy, man consists of three substances, so to 
say. The outermost is the body, the gross form of man, in which are the 
instruments of sensation, such as the eyes, nose, ears, and so forth. This eye is 
not the organ of vision; it is only the instrument. Behind that is the organ. So, 
the ears are not the organs of hearing; they are the instruments, and behind 
them is the organ, or what, in modern physiology, is called the centre. The 
organs are called Indriyas in Sanskrit. If the centre which governs the eyes be 
destroyed, the eyes will not see; so with all our senses. The organs, again, 
cannot sense anything by themselves, until there be something else attached to 
them. That something is the mind. Many times you have observed that you 
were deeply engaged in a certain thought, and the clock struck and you did not 
hear it. Why? The ear was there; vibrations entered it and were carried into the 
brain, yet you did not hear, because the mind was not joined to the organ. The 
impressions of external objects are carried to the organs, and when the mind is 
attached to them, it takes the impressions and gives them, as it were, a 
colouring, which is called egoism, "I". Take the case of a mosquito biting me 
on the finger when I am engaged in some work. I do not feel it, because my 
mind is joined to something else. Later, when my mind is joined to the 
impression conveyed to the Indriyas, a reaction comes. With this reaction I 
become conscious of the mosquito. So even the mind joining itself to the 
organs is not sufficient; there must come the reaction in the form of will. This 
faculty from which the reaction comes, the faculty of knowledge or intellect, is 
called "Buddhi" First, there must be the external instrument, next the organ, 
next the mind must join itself to the organ, then must come the reaction of 
intellect, and when all these things are complete, there immediately flashes the 
idea, "I and the external object", and there is a perception, a concept, 
knowledge. The external organ, which is only the instrument, is in the body, 
and behind that is the internal organ which is finer; then there is the mind, then 
the intellectual faculty, then egoism, which says, "I" — I see, I hear, and so 
forth. The whole process is carried on by certain forces; you may call them 
vital forces; in Sanskrit they are called Prana. This gross part of man, this body, 
in which are the external instruments, is called in Sanskrit, Sthula Sharira, the 







gross body; behind it comes the series, beginning with the organs, the mind, the 
intellect, the egoism. These and the vital forces form a compound which is 
called the fine body, the Sukshma Sharira. These forces are composed of very 
fine elements, so fine that no amount of injury to this body can destroy them; 
they survive all the shocks given to this body. The gross body we see is 
composed of gross material, and as such it is always being renewed and 
changing continuously. But the internal organs, the mind, the intellect, and the 
egoism are composed of the finest material, so fine that they will endure for 
aeons and aeons. They are so fine that they cannot be resisted by anything; they 
can get through any obstruction. The gross body is non-intelligent, so is the 
fine, being composed of fine matter. Although one part is called mind, another 
the intellect, and the third egoism, yet we see at a glance that no one of them 
can be the "Knower". None of them can be the perceiver, the witness, the one 
for whom action is made, and who is the seer of the action. All these 
movements in the mind, or the faculty of intellection, or egoism, must be for 
some one else. These being composed of fine matter cannot be self-effulgent. 
Their luminosity cannot be in themselves. This manifestation of the table, for 
instance, cannot be due to any material thing. Therefore there must be some 
one behind them all, who is the real manifester, the real seer, the real enjoyer 
and He in Sanskrit is called the Atman, the Soul of man, the real Self of man. 
He it is who really sees things. The external instruments and the organs catch 
the impressions and convey them to the mind, and the mind to the intellect, and 
the intellect reflects them as on a mirror, and back of it is the Soul that looks on 
them and gives His orders and His directions. He is the ruler of all these 
instruments, the master in the house, the enthroned king in the body. The 
faculty of egoism, the faculty of intellection, the faculty of cogitation, the 
organs, the instruments, the body, all of them obey His commands. It is He who 
is manifesting all of these. This is the Atman of man. Similarly, we can see that 
what is in a small part of the universe must also be in the whole universe. If 
conformity is the law of the universe, every part of the universe must have been 
built on the same plan as the whole. So we naturally think that behind the gross 
material form which we call this universe of ours, there must be a universe of 
finer matter, which we call thought, and behind that there must be a Soul, 
which makes all this thought possible, which commands, which is the 
enthroned king of this universe. That soul which is behind each mind and each 
body is called Pratyagatman, the individual Atman, and that Soul which is 


behind the universe as its guide, ruler, and governor, is God. 

The next thing to consider is whence all these things come. The answer is: 

What is meant by coming? If it means that something can be produced out of 
nothing, it is impossible. All this creation, manifestation, cannot be produced 
out of zero. Nothing can be produced without a cause, and the effect is but the 
cause reproduced. Here is a glass. Suppose we break it to pieces, and pulverise 
it, and by means of chemicals almost annihilate it. Will it go back to zero? 
Certainly not. The form will break, but the particles of which it is made will be 
there; they will go beyond our senses, but they remain, and it is quite possible 
that out of these materials another glass may be made. If this is true in one case, 
it will be so in every case. Something cannot be made out of nothing. Nor can 
something be made to go back to nothing. It may become finer and finer, and 
then again grosser and grosser. The raindrop is drawn from the ocean in the 
form of vapour, and drifts away through the air to the mountains; there it 
changes again into water and flows back through hundreds of miles down to 
the mother ocean. The seed produces the tree. The tree dies, leaving only the 
seed. Again it comes up as another tree, which again ends in the seed, and so 
on. Look at a bird, how from; the egg it springs, becomes a beautiful bird, lives 
its life and then dies, leaving only other eggs, containing germs of future birds. 
So with the animals; so with men. Everything begins, as it were, from certain 
seeds, certain rudiments, certain fine forms, and becomes grosser and grosser 
as it develops; and then again it goes back to that fine form and subsides. The 
whole universe is going on in this way. There comes a time when this whole 
universe melts down and becomes finer and at last disappears entirely, as it 
were, but remains as superfine matter. We know through modern science and 
astronomy that this earth is cooling down, and in course of time it will become 
very cold, and then it will break to pieces and become finer and finer until it 
becomes ether once more. Yet the particles will all remain to form the material 
out of which another earth will be projected. Again that will disappear, and 
another will come out. So this universe will go back to its causes, and again its 
materials will come together and take form, like the wave that goes down, rises 
again, and takes shape. The acts of going back to causes and coming out again, 
taking form, are called in Sanskrit Sankocha and Vikasha, which mean 
shrinking and expanding. The whole universe, as it were, shrinks, and then it 
expands again. To use the more accepted words of modern science, they are 


involved and evolved. You hear about evolution, how all forms grow from 
lower ones, slowly growing up and up. This is very true, but each evolution 
presupposes an involution. We know that the sum total of energy that is 
displayed in the universe is the same at all times, and that matter is 
indestructible. By no means can you take away one particle of matter. You 
cannot take away a foot-pound of energy or add one. The sum total is the same 
always. Only the manifestation varies, being involved and evolved. So this 
cycle is the evolution out of the involution of the previous cycle, and this cycle 
will again be involved, getting finer and finer, and out of that will come the 
next cycle. The whole universe is going on in this fashion. Thus we find that 
there is no creation in the sense that something is created out of nothing. To use 
a better word, there is manifestation, and God is the manifester of the universe. 
The universe, as it were, is being breathed out of Him, and again it shrinks into 
Him, and again He throws it out. A most beautiful simile is given in the Vedas 
— "That eternal One breathes out this universe and breathes it in." Just as we 
can breathe out a little particle of dust and breathe it in again. That is all very 
good, but the question may be asked: How we, it at the first cycle? The answer 
is: What is the meaning of a first cycle? There was none. If you can give a 
beginning to time, the whole concept of time will be destroyed. Try to think of 
a limit where time began, you have to think of time beyond that limit. Try to 
think where space begins, you will have to think of space beyond that. Time 
and space are infinite, and therefore have neither beginning nor end. This is a 
better idea than that God created the universe in five minutes and then went to 
sleep, and since then has been sleeping. On the other hand, this idea will give 
us God as the Eternal Creator. Here is a series of waves rising and falling, and 
God is directing this eternal process. As the universe is without beginning and 
without end, so is God. We see that it must necessarily be so, because if we say 
there was a time when there was no creation, either in a gross or a fine form, 
then there was no God, because God is known to us as Sakshi, the Witness of 
the universe. When the universe did not exist, neither did He. One concept 
follows the other. The idea of the cause we get from the idea of the effect, and 
if there is no effect, there will be no cause. It naturally follows that as the 
universe is eternal, God is eternal. 

The soul must also be eternal. Why? In the first place we see that the soul is not 
matter. It is neither a gross body, nor a fine body, which we call mind or 


thought. It is neither a physical body, nor what in Christianity is called a 
spiritual body. It is the gross body and the spiritual body that are liable to 
change. The gross body is liable to change almost every minute and dies, but 
the spiritual body endures through long periods, until one becomes free, when 
it also falls away. When a man becomes free, the spiritual body disperses. The 
gross body disintegrates every time a man dies. The soul not being made of any 
particles must be indestructible. What do we mean by destruction? Destruction 
is disintegration of the materials out of which anything is composed. If this 
glass is broken into pieces, the materials will disintegrate, and that will be the 
destruction of the glass. Disintegration of particles is what we mean by 
destruction. It naturally follows that nothing that is not composed of particles 
can be destroyed, can ever be disintegrated. The soul is not composed of any 
materials. It is unity indivisible. Therefore it must be indestructible. For the 
same reasons it must also be without any beginning. So the soul is without any 
beginning and end. 

We have three entities. Here is nature which is infinite, but changeful. The 
whole of nature is without beginning and end, but within it are multifarious 
changes. It is like a river that runs down to the sea for thousands of years. It is 
the same river always, but it is changing every minute, the particles of water 
are changing their position constantly. Then there is God, unchangeable, the 
ruler; and there is the soul unchangeable as God, eternal but under the ruler. 
One is the master, the other the servant, and the third one is nature. 

God being the cause of the projection, the continuance, and the dissolution of 
the universe, the cause must be present to produce the effect. Not only so, the 
cause becomes the effect. Glass is produced out of certain materials and certain 
forces used by the manufacturer. In the glass there are those forces plus the 
materials. The forces used have become the force of adhesion, and if that force 
goes the glass will fall to pieces; the materials also are undoubtedly in the 
glass. Only their form is changed. The cause has become the effect. Wherever 
you see an effect you can always analyze it into a cause, the cause 
manifests itself as the effect. It follows, if God is the cause of the universe, and 
the universe is the effect, that God has become the universe. If souls are the 
effect, and God the cause, God has become the souls. Each soul, therefore, is a 
part of God. "As from a mass of fire an infinite number of sparks fly, even so 


from the Eternal One all this universe of souls has come out." 


We have seen that there is the eternal God, and there is eternal nature. And 
there is also an infinite number of eternal souls. This is the first stage in 
religion, it is called dualism, the stage when man sees himself and God 
eternally separate, when God is a separate entity by Him, self and man is a 
separate entity by himself and nature is a separate entity by itself. This is 
dualism, which holds that the subject and the object are opposed to each other 
in everything. When man looks at nature, he is the subject and nature the 
object. He sees the dualism between subject and object. When he looks at God, 
he sees God as object and himself as the subject. They are entirely separate. 
This is the dualism between man and God. This is generally the first view of 
religion. 

Then comes another view which I have just shown to you. Man begins to find 
out that if God is the cause of the universe and the universe the effect, God 
Himself must have become the universe and the souls, and he is but a particle 
of which God is the whole. We are but little beings, sparks of that mass of fire, 
and the whole universe is a manifestation of God Himself. This is the next step. 
In Sanskrit, it is called VishishtMvaita. Just as I have this body and this body 
covers the soul, and the soul is in and through this body, so this whole universe 
of infinite souls and nature forms, as it were, the body of God. When the period 
of involution comes, the universe becomes finer and finer, yet remains the body 
of God. When the gross manifestation comes, then also the universe remains 
the body of God. Just as the human soul is the soul of the human body and 
minds so God is the Soul of our souls. All of you have heard this expression in 
every religion, "Soul of our souls". That is what is meant by it. He, as it were, 
resides in them, guides them, is the ruler of them all. In the first view, that of 
dualism, each one of us is an individual, eternally separate from God and 
nature. In the second view, we are individuals, but not separate from God. We 
are like little particles floating in one mass, and that mass is God. We are 
individuals but one in God. We are all in Him. We are all parts of Him, and 
therefore we are One. And yet between man and man, man and God there is a 
strict individuality, separate and yet not separate. 

Then comes a still finer question. The question is: Can infinity have parts? 


What is meant by parts of infinity? If you reason it out, you will find that it is 
impossible. Infinity cannot be divided, it always remains infinite. If it could be 
divided, each part would be infinite. And there cannot be two infinites. 

Suppose there were, one would limit the other, and both would be finite. 
Infinity can only be one, undivided. Thus the conclusion will be reached that 
the infinite is one and not many, and that one Infinite Soul is reflecting itself 
through thousands and thousands of mirrors, appearing as so many different 
souls. It is the same Infinite Soul, which is the background of the universe, that 
we call God. The same Infinite Soul also is the background of the human mind 
which we call the human soul. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


COSMOLOGY 

There are two worlds, the microcosm, and the macrocosm, the internal and the 
external. We get truth from both of these by means of experience. The truth 
gathered from internal experience is psychology, metaphysics, and religion; 
from external experience, the physical sciences. Now a perfect truth should be 
in harmony with experiences in both these worlds. The microcosm must bear 
testimony to the macrocosm, and the macrocosm to the microcosm; physical 
truth must have its counterpart in the internal world, and the internal world 
must have its verification outside. Yet, as a rule, we find that many of these 
truths are in conflict. At one period of the world's history, the internals become 
supreme, and they begin to fight the externals. At the present time the 
externals, the physicists, have become supreme, and they have put down many 
claims of psychologists and metaphysicians. So far as my knowledge goes, I 
find that the real, essential parts of psychology are in perfect accord with the 
essential parts of modern physical knowledge. It is not given to one individual 
to be great in every respect; it is not given to one race or nation to be equally 
strong in the research of all fields of knowledge. The modern European nations 
are very strong in their research of external physical knowledge, but they are 
not so strong in their study of the inner nature of man. On the other hand, the 
Orientals have not been very strong in their researches of the external physical 
world, but very strong in their researches of the internal. Therefore we find that 
Oriental physics and other sciences are not in accordance with Occidental 
Sciences; nor is Occidental psychology in harmony with Oriental psychology. 
The Oriental physicists have been routed by Occidental scientists. At the same 
time, each claims to rest on truth; and as we stated before, real truth in any field 
of knowledge will not contradict itself; the truths internal are in harmony with 
the truths external. 

We all know the theories of the cosmos according to the modern astronomers 
and physicists; and at the same time we all know how woefully they undermine 
the theology of Europe, how these scientific discoveries that are made act as a 
bomb thrown at its stronghold; and we know how theologians have in all times 
attempted to put down these researches. 






I want here to go over the psychological ideas of the Orientals about 
cosmology and all that pertains to it, and you will find how wonderfully they 
are in accordance with the latest discoveries of modern science; and where 
there is disharmony, you will find that it is modern science which lacks and not 
they. We all use the word nature. The old Sankhya philosophers called it by 
two different names, Prakriti, which is very much the same as the word nature, 
and the more scientific name, Avyakta, undifferentiated, from which 
everything proceeds, such as atoms, molecules, and forces, mind, thought, and 
intelligence. It is startling to find that the philosophers and metaphysicians of 
India stated ages ago that mind is material. What are our present materialists 
trying to do, but to show that mind is as much a product of nature as the body? 
And so is thought, and, we shall find by and by, intelligence also: all issue from 
that nature which is called Avyakta, the undifferentiated. The Sankhyas define 
it as the equilibrium of three forces, one of which is called Sattva, another 
Rajas, and the third Tamas. Tamas, the lowest force, is that of attraction; a little 
higher is Rajas, that of repulsion; and the highest is the balance of these two, 
Sattva; so that when these two forces, attraction and repulsion, are held in 
perfect control by the Sattva there is no creation, no movement in the world. As 
soon as this equilibrium is lost, the balance is disturbed, and one of these forces 
gets stronger than the other, motion sets in, and creation begins. This state of 
things goes on cyclically, periodically. That is to say, there is a period of 
disturbance of the balance, when forces begin to combine and recombine, and 
things project outwards. At the same time, everything has a tendency to go 
back to the primal state of equilibrium, and the time comes when that total 
annihilation of all manifestation is reached. Again, after a period, the whole 
thing is disturbed, projected outwards, and again it slowly goes down — like 
waves. All motion, everything in this universe, can be likened to waves 
undergoing successive rise and fall. Some of these philosophers hold that the 
whole universe quiets down for a period. Others hold that this quieting down 
applies only to systems; that is to say, that while our system here, this solar 
system, will quiet down and go back into the undifferentiated state, millions of 
other systems will go the other way, and will project outwards. I should rather 
favour the second opinion, that this quieting down is not simultaneous over the 
whole of the universe, and that in different parts different things go on. But the 
principle remains the same, that all we see — that is, nature herself — is 





progressing in successive rises and falls. The one stage, falling down, going 
back to balance, the perfect equilibrium, is called Pralaya, the end of a cycle. 
The projection and the Pralaya of the universe have been compared by 
theistical writers in India to the outbreathing and inbreathing of God; God, as it 
were, breathes out the universe, and it comes into Him again. When it quiets 
down, what becomes of the universe? It exists, only in finer forms, in the form 
of cause, as it is called in the Sankhya philosophy. It does not get rid of 
causation, time, and space; they are there, only it comes to very fine and minute 
forms. Supposing that this whole universe begins to shrink, till every one of us 
becomes just a little molecule, we should not feel the change at all, because 
everything relating to us would be shrinking at the same time. The whole thing 
goes down, and again projects out, the cause brings out the effect, and so it 
goes on. 

What we call matter in modern times was called by; the ancient psychologists 
Bhutas, the external elements. There is one element which, according to them, 
is eternal; every other element is produced out of this one. It is called Akasha. 
It is somewhat similar to the idea of ether of the moderns, though not exactly 
similar. Along with this element, there is the primal energy called Prana. Prana 
and Akasha combine and recombine and form the elements out of them. Then 
at the end of the Kalpa; everything subsides, and goes back to Akasha and 
Prana. There is in the Rig-Veda, the oldest human writing in existence, a 
beautiful passage describing creation, and it is most poetical — "When there 
was neither aught nor naught, when darkness was rolling over darkness, what 
existed?" and the answer is given, "It then existed without vibration". This 
Prana existed then, but there was no motion in it; Anidavatam means "existed 
without vibration". Vibration had stopped. Then when the Kalpa begins, after 
an immense interval, the Anidavatam (unvibrating atom) commences to 
vibrate, and blow after blow is given by Prana to Akasha. The atoms become 
condensed, and as they are condensed different elements are formed. We 
generally find these things very curiously translated; people do not go to the 
philosophers or the commentators for their translation, and have not the brains 
to understand them themselves. A silly man reads three letters of Sanskrit and 
translates a whole book. They translate the, elements as air, fire, and so on; if 
they would go to the commentators, they would find they do not mean air or 
anything of the sort. 


The Akasha, acted upon by the repeated blows of Prana, produces Vayu or 
vibrations. This Vayu vibrates, and the vibrations growing more and more 

rapid result in friction giving rise to heat, Tejas. Then this heat ends in 

>\ _ 

liquefaction, Apah. Then that liquid becomes solid. We had ether, and motion, 
then came heat, then it became liquefied, and then it condensed into gross 
matter; and it goes back in exactly the reverse way. The solid will be liquefied 
and will then be converted into a mass of heat, and that will slowly get back 
into motion; that motion will stop, and this Kalpa will be destroyed. Then, 
again it will come back and again dissolve into ether. Prana cannot work alone 
without the help of Akasha. All that we know in the form of motion, vibration, 
or thought is a modification of the Prana, and everything that we know in the 
shape of matter, either as form or as resistance, is a modification of the Akasha. 
The Prana cannot live alone, or act without a medium; when it is pure Prana, it 
has the Akasha itself to live in, and when it changes into forces of nature, say 
gravitation, or centrifugal force, it must have matter. You have never seen force 
without matter or matter without force; what we call force and matter are 
simply the gross manifestations of these same things, which, when superfine, 
are called Prana and Akasha. Prana you can call in English life, the vital force; 
but you must not restrict it to the life of man; at the same time you must not 
identify it with Spirit, Atman. So this goes on. Creation cannot have either a 
beginning or an end; it is an eternal on-going. 

We shall state another position of these old psychologists, which is that all 
gross things are the results of fine ones. Everything that is gross is composed of 
fine things, which they call the Tanmatras, the fine particles. I smell a flower. 
To smell, something must come in contact with my nose; the flower is there, 
but I do not see it move towards me. That which comes from the flower and in 
contact with my nose is called the Tanmatra, fine molecules of that flower. So 
with heat, light and everything. These Tanmatras can again be subdivided into 
atoms. Different philosophers have different theories, and we know these are 
only theories. It is sufficient for our purpose to know that everything gross is 
composed of things that are very, very fine. We first get the gross elements 
which we feel externally, and then come the fine elements with which the nose, 
eyes, and ears come in contact. Ether waves touch my eyes; I cannot see them, 
yet I know they must come in contact with my eyes before I can see light. 


Here are the eyes, but the eyes do not see. Take away the brain centre; the eyes 
will still be there, as also the picture of the outside world complete on the 
retinae; yet the eyes will not see. So the eyes are only a secondary instrument, 
not the organ of vision. The organ of vision is the nerve-centre in the brain. 
Likewise the nose is an instrument, and there is an organ behind it. The senses 
are simply the external instruments. It may be said that these different organs, 
Indriyas, as they are called in Sanskrit, are the real seats of perception. 

It is necessary for the mind to be joined to an organ to perceive. It is a common 
experience that we do not hear the clock strike when we happen to be buried in 
study. Why? The ear was there, the sound was carried through it to the brain; 
yet it was not heard, because the mind did not attach itself to the organ of 
hearing. 

There is a different organ for each different instrument. For, if one served for 
all, we should find that when the mind joined itself to it, all the senses would be 
equally active. But it is not so, as we have seen from the instance of the clock. 

If there was only one organ for all the instruments, the mind would see and 
hear at the same time, would see and hear and smell at the same time, and it 
would be impossible for it not to do all these at one and the same time. 
Therefore it is necessary that there should be a separate organ for each sense. 
This has been borne out by modern physiology. It is certainly possible for us to 
hear and see at the same time, but that is because the mind attaches itself 
partially to the two centres. 

What are the organs made of? We see that the instruments — eyes, nose, and 
ears — are made of gross materials. The organs are also made of matter. Just as 
the body is composed of gross materials, and manufactures Prana into different 
gross forces, so the organs are composed of the fine elements, Akasha, Vayu, 
Tejas, etc., and manufacture Prana into the finer forces of perception. The 
organs, the Prana functions, the mind and the Buddhi combined, are called the 
finer body of man — the Linga or Sukshma Sharira. The Linga Sharira has a 
real form because everything material must have a form. 

The mind is called the Manas, the Chitta in Vritti or vibrating, the unsettled 
state. If you throw a stone in a lake, first there will be vibration, and then 



resistance. For a moment the water will vibrate and then it will react on the 
stone. So when any impression comes on the Chitta, it first vibrates a little. 

That is called the Manas. The mind carries the impression farther in, and 
presents it to the determinative faculty, Buddhi, which reacts. Behind Buddhi is 
Ahamkara, egoism, the self-consciousness which says, "I am". Behind 
Ahamkara is Mahat, intelligence, the highest form of nature's existence. Each 
one is the effect of the succeeding one. In the case of the lake, every blow that 
comes to it is from the external world, while in the case of the mind, the blow 
may come either from the external or the internal world. Behind the 
intelligence is the Self of man, the Purusha, the Atman, the pure, the perfect, 
who alone is the seer, and for whom is all this change. 

Man looks on all these changes; he himself is never impure; but through what 
the Vedantists call Adhyasa, by reflection, by implication, he seems to be 
impure. It is like the appearance of a crystal when a red or a blue flower is 
brought before it: the colour is reflected on it, but the crystal itself is pure. We 
shall take it for granted that there are many selves, and each self is pure and 
perfect; various kinds of gross and fine matter superimpose themselves on the 
self and make it multicoloured. Why does nature do all this? Nature is 
undergoing all these changes for the development of the soul; all this creation 
is for the benefit of the soul, so that it may be free. This immense book which 
we call the universe is stretched out before man so that he may read; and he 
discovers eventually that he is an omniscient and omnipotent being. I must here 
tell you that some of our best psychologists do not believe in God in the sense 
in which you believe in Him. The father of our psychology, Kapila, denies the 
existence of God. His idea is that a Personal God is quite unnecessary; nature 
itself is sufficient to work out the whole of creation. What is called the Design 
Theory, he knocked on the head, and said that a more childish theory was never 
advanced. But he admits a peculiar kind of God. He says we are all struggling 
to get free; and when we become free, we can, as it were, melt away into 
nature, only to come out at the beginning of the next cycle and be its ruler. We 
come out omniscient and omnipotent beings. In that sense we can be called 
Gods; you and I and the humblest beings can be Gods in different cycles. He 
says such a God will be temporal; but an eternal God, eternally omnipotent and 
ruler of the universe cannot be. If there was such a God, there would be this 
difficulty: He must be either a bound spirit or a free one. A God who is 


perfectly free would not create: there is no necessity for it. If He were bound, 
He would not create, because He could not: He would be powerless. In either 
case, there cannot be any omniscient or omnipotent eternal ruler. In our 
scriptures, wherever the word God is mentioned, he says, it means those human 
beings who have become free. 

Kapila does not believe in the unity of all souls. His analysis, so far as it goes, 
is simply marvellous. He is the father of Indian thinkers; Buddhism and other 
systems are the outcome of his thought. 

According to his psychology, all souls can regain their freedom and their 
natural rights, which are omnipotence and omniscience. But the question arises: 
Where is this bondage? Kapila says it is without beginning. But if it is without 
beginning, it must be without end, and we shall never be free. He says that 
though bondage is without beginning, it is not of that constant uniform 
character as the soul is. In other words, nature (the cause of bondage) is without 
beginning and end, but not in the same sense as soul, because nature has no 
individuality; it is like a river which gets a fresh body of water every moment; 
the sum total of these bodies of water is the river, but the river is not a constant 
quantity. Everything in nature is constantly changing, but the soul never 
changes; so, as nature is always changing, it is possible for the soul to come out 
of its bondage. 

The whole of the universe is built upon the same plan as a part of it. So, just as 
I have a mind, there is a cosmic mind. As in the individual, so in the universal. 
There is the universal gross body; behind that, a universal fine body; behind 
that, a universal mind; behind that, a universal egoism, or consciousness; and 
behind that, a universal intelligence. And all this is in nature, the manifestation 
of nature, not outside of it. 

We have the gross bodies from our parents, as also our consciousness. Strict 
heredity says my body is a part of my parents' bodies, the material of my 
consciousness and egoism is a part of my parents'. We can add to the little 
portion inherited from our parents by drawing upon the universal 
consciousness. There is an infinite storehouse of intelligence out of which we 
draw what we require; there is an infinite storehouse of mental force in the 


universe out of which we are drawing eternally; but the seed must come from 
the parents. Our theory is heredity coupled with reincarnation. By the law of 
heredity, the reincarnating soul receives from parents the material out of which 
to manufacture a man. 

Some of the European philosophers have asserted that this world exists because 
I exist; and if I do not exist, the world will not exist. Sometimes it is stated 
thus: If all the people in the world were to die, and there were no more human 
beings, and no animals with powers of perception and intelligence, all these 
manifestations would disappear. But these European philosophers do not know 
the psychology of it, although they know the principle; modern philosophy has 
got only a glimpse of it. This becomes easy of understanding when looked at 
from the Sankhya point of view. According to Sankhya, it is impossible for 
anything to be, which has not as its material, some portion of my mind. I do not 
know this table as it is. An impression from it comes to the eyes, then to, the 
Indriya, and then to the mind; and the mind reacts, and that reaction is what I 
call the table. It is just the same as throwing a stone in a lake; the lake throws a 
wave towards the stone; this wave is what we know. What is external nobody 
knows; when I try to know it, it has to become that material which I furnish. I, 
with my own mind, have furnished the material for my eyes. There is 
something which is outside, which is only, the occasion, the suggestion, and 
upon that suggestion I project my mind; and it takes the form that I see. How 
do we all see the same things? Because we all have; similar parts of the cosmic 
mind. Those who have like minds will see like things, and those who have not 
will not see alike. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


A STUDY OF THE SANKHYA PHILOSOPHY 

Prakriti is called by the Sankhya philosophers indiscrete, and defined as the 
perfect balance of the materials in it; and it naturally follows that in perfect 
balance there cannot be any motion. In the primal state before any 
manifestation, when there was no motion but perfect balance, this Prakriti was 
indestructible, because decomposition or death comes from instability or 
change. Again, according to the Sankhya, atoms are not the primal state. This 
universe does not come out of atoms: they may be the secondary or the tertiary 
state. The primordial material may form into atoms and become grosser and 
bigger things; and as far as modern investigations go, they rather point towards 
the same conclusion. For instance, in the modern theory of ether, if you say 
ether is atomic, it will not solve anything. To make it clearer, say that air is 
composed of atoms, and we know that ether is everywhere, interpenetrating, 
omnipresent, and that these air atoms are floating, as it were, in ether. If ether 
again be composed of atoms, there will still be spaces between every two atoms 
of ether. What fills up these? If you suppose that there is another ether still 
finer which does this, there will again be other spaces between the atoms of 
that finer ether which require filling up, and so it will be regressus ad infinitum, 
what the Sankhya philosophers call the "cause leading to nothing" So the 
atomic theory cannot be final. According to Sankhya, nature is omnipresent, 
one omnipresent mass of nature, in which are the causes of everything that 
exists. What is meant by cause? Cause is the fine state of the manifested state; 
the unmanifested state of that which becomes manifested. What do you mean 
by destruction? It is reverting to the cause If you have a piece of pottery and 
give it a blow, it is destroyed. What is meant by this is that the effects go back 
to their own nature, they materials out of which the pottery was created go back 
into their original state. Beyond this idea of destruction, any idea such as 
annihilation is on the face of it absurd. According to modern physical science, 
it can be demonstrated that all destruction means that which Kapila said ages 
ago — simply reverting to the cause. Going back to the finer form is all that is 
meant by destruction. You know how it can be demonstrated in a laboratory 
that matter is indestructible. At this present stage of our knowledge, if any man 
stands up and says that matter or this soul becomes annihilated, he is only 






making himself, ridiculous; it is only uneducated, silly people who would 
advance such a proposition; and it is curious that modern knowledge coincides 
with what those old philosophers taught. It must be so, and that is the proof of 
truth. They proceeded in their inquiry, taking up mind as the basis; they 
analysed the mental part of this universe and came to certain conclusions, 
which we, analysing the physical part, must come to, for they both must lead to 
the same centre. 

You must remember that the first manifestation of this Prakriti in the cosmos is 
what the Sankhya calls "Mahat". We may call it intelligence — the great 
principle, its literal meaning. The first change in Prakriti is this intelligence; I 
would not translate it by self-consciousness, because that would be wrong. 
Consciousness is only a part of this intelligence. Mahat is universal. It covers 
all the grounds of sub-consciousness, consciousness, and super-consciousness; 
so any one state of consciousness, as applied to this Mahat, would not be 
sufficient. In nature, for instance, you note certain changes going on before 
your eyes which you see and understand, but there are other changes, so much 
finer, that no human perception can catch them. The are from the same cause, 
the same Mahat is making these changes. Out of Mahat comes universal 
egoism. These are all substance. There is no difference between matter and 
mind, except in degree. The substance is the same in finer or grosser form; one 
changes into the other, and this exactly coincides with the conclusions of 
modern physiological research. By believing in the teaching that the mind is 
not separate from the brain, you will be saved from much fighting and 
struggling. Egoism again changes into two varieties. In one variety it changes 
into the organs. Organs are of two kinds, organs of sensation and organs of 
reaction. They are not the eyes or the ears, but back of those are what you call 
brain-centres, and nerve-centres, and so on. This egoism, this matter or 
substance, becomes changed, and out of this material are manufactured these 
centres. Of the same substance is manufactured the other variety, the 
Tanmatras, fine particles of matter, which strike our organs of perception and 
bring about sensations. You cannot perceive them but only know they are there. 
Out of the Tanmatras is manufactured the gross matter — earth, water, and all 
the things that we see and feel. I want to impress this on your mind. It is very, 
hard to grasp it, because in Western countries the ideas are so queer about mind 
and matter. It is hard to get those impressions out of our brains. I myself had a 



tremendous difficulty, being educated in Western philosophy in my boyhood. 
These are all cosmic things. Think of this universal extension of matter, 
unbroken, one substance, undifferentiated, which is the first state of everything, 
and which begins to change in the same way as milk becomes curd. This first 
change is called Mahat. The substance Mahat changes into the grosser matter 
called egoism. The third change is manifested as universal sense-organs, and 
universal fine particles, and these last again combine and become this gross 
universe which with eyes, nose, and ears, we see, smell, and hear. This is the 
cosmic plan according to the Sankhya, and what is in the cosmos must also be 
microcosmic. Take an individual man. He has first a part of undifferentiated 
nature in him, and that material nature in him becomes changed into this 
Mahat, a small particle of this universal intelligence, and this particle of 
universal intelligence in him becomes changed into egoism, and then into the 
sense-organs and the fine particles of matter which combine and manufacture 
his body. I want this to be clear, because it is the stepping-stone to Sankhya, 
and it is absolutely necessary for you to understand it, because this is the basis 
of the philosophy of the whole world. There is no philosophy in the world that 
is not indebted to Kapila. Pythagoras came to India and studied this philosophy, 
and that was the beginning of the philosophy of the Greeks. Later, it formed the 
Alexandrian school, and still later, the Gnostic. It became divided into two; one 
part went to Europe and Alexandria, and the other remained in India; and out of 
this, the system of Vyasa was developed. The Sankhya philosophy of Kapila 
was the first rational system that the world ever saw. Every metaphysician in 
the world must pay homage to him. I want to impress on your mind that we are 
bound to listen to him as the great father of philosophy. This wonderful man, 
the most ancient of philosophers, is mentioned even in the Shruti: "O Lord, 
Thou who produced the sage Kapila in the Beginning." How wonderful his 
perceptions were, and if there is ant proof required of the extraordinary power 
of the perception of Yogis, such men are the proof. They had no microscopes 
or telescopes. Yet how fine their perception was, how perfect and wonderful 
their analysis of things! 

I will here point out the difference between Schopenhauer and the Indian 
philosophy. Schopenhauer says that desire, or will, is the cause of everything. It 
is the will to exist that make us manifest, but we deny this. The will is identical 
with the motor nerves. When I see an object there is no will; when its 


sensations are carried to the brain, there comes the reaction, which says "Do 
this", or "Do not do this", and this state of the ego-substance is what is called 
will. There cannot be a single particle of will which is not a reaction. So many 
things precede will. It is only a manufactured something out of the ego, and the 
ego is a manufacture of something still higher — the intelligence — and that 
again is a modification of the indiscrete nature. That was the Buddhistic idea, 
that whatever we see is the will. It is psychologically entirely wrong, because 
will can only be identified with the motor nerves. If you take out the motor 
nerves, a man has no will whatever. This fact, as is perhaps well known to you, 
has been found out after a long series of experiments made with the lower 
animals. 

We will take up this question. It is very important to understand this question 
of Mahat in man, the great principle, the intelligence. This intelligence itself is 
modified into what we call egoism, and this intelligence is the cause of all the 
powers in the body. It covers the whole ground, sub-consciousness, 
consciousness, and super-consciousness. What are these three states? The sub¬ 
conscious state we find in animals, which we call instinct. This is almost 
infallible, but very limited. Instinct rarely fails. An animal almost instinctively 
knows a poisonous herb from an edible one, but its instinct is very limited. As 
soon as something new comes, it is blind. It works like a machine. Then comes 
a higher state of knowledge which is fallible and makes mistakes often, but has 
a larger scope, although it is slow, and this you call reason. It is much larger 
than instinct, but instinct is surer than reason. There are more chances of 
mistakes in reasoning than in instinct. There is a still higher state of the mind, 
the super-conscious, which belongs only to Yogis, to men who have cultivated 
it. This is infallible and much more unlimited in its scope than reason. This is 
the highest state. So we must remember, this Mahat is the real cause of all that 
is here, that which manifests itself in various ways, covers the whole ground of 
sub-conscious, conscious, and super-conscious, the three states in which 
knowledge exists. 

Now comes a delicate question which is being always asked. If a perfect God 
created the universe, why is there imperfection in it? What we call the universe 
is what we see, and that is only this little plane of consciousness and reason; 
beyond that we do not see at all. Now the very question is an impossible one. If 



I take only a small portion out of a mass of something and look at it, it seems to 
be inharmonious. Naturally. The universe is inharmonious because we make it 
so. How? What is reason? What is knowledge? Knowledge is finding the 
association about things. You go into the street and see a man and say, I know 
this is a man; because you remember the impressions on your mind, the marks 
on the Chitta. You have seen many men, and each one has made an impression 
on your mind; and as you see this man, you refer this to your store and see 
many similar pictures there; and when you see them, you are satisfied, and you 
put this new one with the rest. When a new impression comes and it has 
associations in your mind, you are satisfied; and this state of association is 
called knowledge. Knowledge is, therefore, pigeon-holing one experience with 
the already existing fund of experience, and this is one of the great proofs of 
the fact that you cannot have any knowledge until you have already a fund in 
existence. If you are without experience, as some European philosophers think, 
and that your mind is a tabula rasa to begin with, you cannot get any 
knowledge, because the very fact of knowledge is the recognition of the new by 
means of associations already existing in the mind. There must be a store at 
hand to which to refer a new impression. Suppose a child is born into this 
world without such a fund, it would be impossible for him ever to get any 
knowledge. Therefore, the child must have been previously in a state in which 
he had a fund, and so knowledge is eternally increasing. Slow me a way of 
getting round this argument. It is a mathematical fact. Some Western schools of 
philosophy also hold that there cannot be any knowledge without a fund of past 
knowledge. They have framed the idea that the child is born with knowledge. 
These Western philosophers say that the impressions with which the child 
comes into the world are not due to the child's past, but to the experiences of 
his forefathers: it is only hereditary transmission. Soon they will find out that 
this idea is all wrong; some German philosophers are now giving hard blows to 
these heredity ideas. Heredity is very good, but incomplete, it only explains the 
physical side. How do you explain the environments influencing us? Many 
causes produce one effect. Environment is one of the modifying effects. We 
make our own environment: as our past is, so we find the present environment. 
A drunken man naturally gravitates to the lowest slums of the city. 

You understand what is meant by knowledge. Knowledge is pigeon-holing a 
new impression with old ones, recognising a new impression. What is meant by 


recognition? Finding associations with similar impressions that one already 
has. Nothing further is meant by knowledge. If that is the case, if knowledge 
means finding the associations, then it must be that to know anything we have 
to set the whole series of its similars. Is it not so? Suppose you take a pebble; to 
find the association, you have to see the whole series of pebbles similes to it. 
But with our perception of the universe as a whole we cannot do that, because 
in the pigeon-hole of our mind there is only one single record of the perception, 
we have no other perception of the same nature or class, we cannot compare it 
with any other. We cannot refer it to its associations. This bit of the universe, 
cut off by our consciousness, is a startling new thing, because we have not been 
able to find its associations. Therefore, we are struggling with it, and thinking it 
horrible, wicked, and bad; we may sometimes think it is good, but we always 
think it is imperfect. It is only when we find its associations that the universe 
can be known. We shall recognise it when we go beyond the universe and 
consciousness, and then the universe will stand explained. Until we can do that, 
all the knocking of our heads against a wall will never explain the universe, 
because knowledge is the finding of similars, and this conscious plane only 
gives us one single perception of it. So with our idea of God. All that we see of 
God is only a part just as we see only one portion of the universe, and all the 
rest is beyond human cognition. "I, the universal; so great am I that even this 
universe is but a part of Me." That is why we see God as imperfect, and do not 
understand Him. The only way to understand Him and the universe is to go 
beyond reason, beyond consciousness. "When thou goest beyond the heard and 
the hearing, the thought and the thinking, then alone wilt thou come to Truth." 
"Go thou beyond the scriptures, because they teach only up to nature, up to the 
three qualities." When we go beyond them, we find the harmony, and not 
before. 

The microcosm and the macrocosm are built on exactly the same plan, and in 
the microcosm we know only one part, the middle part. We know neither the 
sub-conscious, nor the super-conscious. We know the conscious only. If a man 
stands up and says, "I am a sinner", he makes an untrue statement because he 
does not know himself. He is the most ignorant of men; of himself he knows 
only one part, because his knowledge covers only a part of the ground he is on. 
So with this universe, it is possible to know only a part of it with the reason, 
not the whole of it; for the sub-conscious, the conscious and the super- 


conscious, the individual Mahat and the universal Mahat, and all the 
subsequent modifications, constitute the universe. 

What makes nature (Prakriti) change? We see so far that everything, all 
Prakriti, is Jada, insentient. It is all compound and insentient. Wherever there is 
law, it is proof that the region of its play is insentient. Mind, intelligence, will, 
and everything else is insentient. But they are all reflecting the sentiency, the 
"Chit" of some being who is beyond all this, whom the Sankhya philosophers 
call "Purusha". The Purusha is the unwitting cause of all the changes in the 
universe. That is to say, this Purusha, taking Him in the universal sense, is the 
God of the universe. It is said that the will of the Lord created the universe. It is 
very good as a common expression, but we see it cannot be true. How could it 
be will? Will is the third or fourth manifestation in nature. Many things exist 
before it, and what created theml Will is a compound, and everything that is a 
compound is a product of nature. Will, therefore, could not create nature. So, to 
say that the will of the Lord created the universe is meaningless. Our will only 
covers a little portion of self-consciousness and moves our brain. It is not will 
that is working your body or that is working the universe. This body is being 
moved by a power of which will is only a manifestation in one part. Likewise 
in the universe there is will, but that is only one part of the universe. The whole 
of the universe is not guided by will; that is why we cannot explain it by the 
will theory. Suppose I take it for granted that it is will moving the body, then, 
when I find I cannot work it at will, I begin to fret and fume. It is my fault, 
because I had no right to take the will theory for granted. In the same way, if I 
take the universe and think it is will that moves it and find things which do not 
coincide, it is my fault. So the Purusha is not will; neither can it be intelligence, 
because intelligence itself is a compound. There cannot be any intelligence 
without some sort of matter corresponding to the brain. Wherever there is 
intelligence, there must be something akin to that matter which we call brain 
which becomes lumped together into a particular form and serves the purpose 
of the brain. Wherever there is intelligence, there must be that matter in some 
form or other. But intelligence itself is a compound. What then is this Purusha? 
It is neither intelligence nor will, but it is the cause of all these. It is its presence 
that sets them all going and combining. It does not mix with nature; it is not 
intelligence, or Mahat; but the Self, the pure, is Purusha. "I am the witness, and 
through my witnessing, nature is producing; all that is sentient and all that is 


insentient." 


What is this sentiency in nature? We find intelligence is this sentiency which is 
called Chit. The basis of sentiency is in the Purusha, it is the nature of Purusha. 
It is that which cannot be explained but which is the cause of all that we call 
knowledge. Purusha is not consciousness, because consciousness is a 
compound; buts whatever is light and good in consciousness belongs to 
Purusha. Purusha is not conscious, but whatever is light in intelligence belongs 
to Purusha. Sentiency is in the Purusha, but the Purusha is not intelligent, not 
knowing. The Chit in the Purusha plus Prakrit! is what we see around us. 
Whatever is pleasure and happiness and light in the universe belongs to 
Purusha; but it is a compound, because it is Purusha plus Prakriti. "Wherever 
there is any happiness, wherever there is any bliss, there is a spark of that 
immortality which is God." "Purusha is the; great attraction of the universe; 
though untouched by and unconnected with the universe, yet it attracts the 
whole; universe." You see a man going after gold, because behind it is a spark 
of the Purusha though mixed up with a good deal of dirt. When a man loves his 
children or a woman her husband, what is the attracting power? A spark of 
Purusha behind them. It is there, only mixed up with "dirt". Nothing else can 
attract. "In this world of insentiency the Purusha alone is sentient." This is the 
Purusha of the Sankhya. As such, it necessarily follows that the Purusha must 
be omnipresent. That which is not omnipresent must be limited. All limitations 
are caused; that which is caused must have a beginning and end. If the Purusha 
is limited, it will die, will not be free, will not be final, but must have some 
cause. Therefore it is omnipresent. According to Kapila, there are many 
Purushas; not one, but an infinite number of them. You and I have each of us 
one, and so has everyone else; an infinite number of circles, each one infinite, 
running through this universe. The Purusha is neither mind nor matter, the 
reflex from it is all that we know. We are sure if it is omnipresent it has neither 
death nor birth. Nature is casting her shadow upon it, the shadow of birth and 
death, but it is by its nature pure. So far we have found the philosophy of the 
Sankhya wonderful. 

Next we shall take up the proofs against it. So far the analysis is perfect, the 
psychology incontrovertible. We find by the division of the senses into organs 
and instruments that they are not simple, but compound; by dividing egoism 


into sense and matter, we find that this is also material and that Mahat is also a 
state of matter, and finally we find the Purusha. So far there is no objection. 
But if we ask the Sankhya the question, "Who created nature?" — the Sankhya 
says that the Purusha and the Prakriti are uncreate and omnipresent, and that of 
this Purusha there is an infinite number. We shall have to controvert these 
propositions, and find a better solution, and by so doing we shall come to 
Advaitism. Our first objection is, how can there be these two infinites? Then 
our argument will be that the Sankhya is not a perfect generalization, and that 
we have not found in it a perfect solution. And then we shall see how the 
Vedantists grope out of all these difficulties and reach a perfect solution, and 
yet all the glory really belongs to the Sankhya. It is very easy to give a 
finishing touch to a building when it is constructed. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


SANKHYA AND VEDANTA 

I shall give you a resume of the Sankhya philosophy, through which we have 
been going. We, in this lecture, want to find where its defects are, and where 
Vedanta comes in and supplements it. You must remember that according to 
Sankhya philosophy, nature is the cause of all these manifestations which we 
call thought, intellect, reason, love, hatred, touch, taste, and matter. Everything 
is from nature. This nature consists of three sorts of elements, called Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas. These are not qualities, but elements, the materials out of 
which the whole universe is evolved. In the beginning of a cycle these remain in 
equilibrium; and when creation comes, they begin to combine and recombine 
and manifest as the universe. The first manifestation is what the Sankhya calls 
the Mahat or Intelligence, and out of that comes consciousness. According to 
Sankhya, this is an element (Tattva). And out of consciousness are evolved 
Manas or mind, the organs of the senses, and the Tanmatras (particles of sound, 
touch, etc.). All the fine particles are evolved from consciousness, and out of 
these fine particles come the gross elements which we call matter. The 
Tanmatras cannot be perceived; but when they become gross particles, we can 
feel and sense them. 

The Chitta, in its threefold function of intelligence, consciousness, and mind, 
works and manufactures the forces called Prana. You must at once get rid of the 
idea that Prana is breath. Breath is one effect of Prana. By Prana are meant the 
nervous forces governing and moving the whole body, which also manifest 
themselves as thought. The foremost and most obvious manifestation of Prana 
is the breathing motion. Prana acts upon air, and not air upon it. Controlling the 
breathing motion is pranayama. Pranayama is practised to get mastery over this 
motion; the end is not merely to control the breath or to make the lungs strong. 
That is Delsarte, not Pranayama. These Pranas are the vital forces which 
manipulate the whole body, while they in their turn are manipulated by other 
organs in the body, which are called mind or internal organs. So far so good. 

The psychology is very clear and most precise; and yet it is the oldest rational 
thought in the world! Wherever there is any philosophy or rational thought, it 
owes something or other to Kapila. Pythagoras learnt it in India, and taught it in 
Greece. Later on Plato got an inkling of it; and still later the Gnostics carried the 






thought to Alexandria, and from there it came to Europe. So wherever there is 
any attempt at psychology or philosophy, the great father of it is this man, 
Kapila. So far we see that his psychology is wonderful; but we shall have to 
differ with him on some points, as we go on. We find that the basic principle on 
which Kapila works, is evolution. He makes one thing evolve out of another, 
because his very definition of causation is "the cause reproduced in another 
form," and because the whole universe, so far as we see it, is progressive and 
evolving. We see clay; in another form, we call it a pitcher. Clay was the cause 
and the pitcher the effect. Beyond this we cannot have any idea of causation. 
Thus this whole universe is evolved out of a material, out of Prakrit! or nature. 
Therefore, the universe cannot be essentially different from its cause. According 
to Kapila, from undifferentiated nature to thought or intellect, not one of them is 
what he calls the "Enjoyer" or "Enlightener". Just as is a lump of clay, so is a 
lump of mind. By itself the mind has no light; but ate see it reasons. Therefore 
there must be some one behind it, whose light is percolating through Mahat and 
consciousness, and subsequent modifications, and this is what Kapila calls the 
Purusha, the Self of the Vedantin. According to Kapila, the Purusha is a simple 
entity, not a compound; he is immaterial, the only one who is immaterial, and 
all these various manifestations are material. I see a black-board. Eirst, the 
external instruments will bring that sensation to the nerve-centre, to the Indriya 
according to Kapila; from the centre it will go to the mind and make an 
impression; the mind will present it to the Buddhi, but Buddhi cannot act; the 
action comes, as it were, from the Purusha behind. These, so to speak, are all his 
servants, bringing the sensations to him, and he, as it were, gives the orders, 
reacts, is the enjoyer, the perceiver, the real One, the King on his throne, the 
Self of man, who is immaterial. Because he is immaterial, it necessarily follows 
that he must be infinite, he cannot have any limitation whatever. Each one of the 
Purushas is omnipresent; each one of us is omnipresent, but we can act only 
through the Linga Sharira, the fine body. The mind, the self-consciousness, the 
organs, and the vital forces compose the fine body or sheath, what in Christian 
philosophy is called the spiritual body of man. It is this body that gets salvation, 
or punishment, or heaven, that incarnates and reincarnates, because we see from 
the very beginning that the going and the coming of the Purusha or soul are 
impossible. Motion means going or coming, and what goes or comes from one 
place to another cannot be omnipresent. Thus far we see from Kapila's 
psychology that the soul is infinite, and that the soul is the only thing which is 


not composed of nature. He is the only one that is outside of nature, but he has 
got bound by nature, apparently. Nature is around him, and he has identified 
himself with it. He thinks, "I am the Linga Sharira", "I am the gross matter, the 
gross body", and as such he enjoys pleasure and pain, but they do not really 
belong to him, they belong to this Linga Sharira or the fine body. 

The meditative state is called always the highest state by the Yogi, when it is 
neither a passive nor an active state; in it you approach nearest to the Purusha. 
The soul has neither pleasure nor pain; it is the witness of everything, the 
eternal witness of all work, but it takes no fruits from any work. As the sun is 
the cause of sight of every eye, but is not itself affected by any defects in the 
eye or as when a crystal has red or blue flowers placed before it, the crystal 
looks red or blue, and yet it is neither; so, the soul is neither passive nor active, 
it is beyond both. The nearest way of expressing this state of the soul is that it is 
meditation. This is Sankhya philosophy. 

Next, Sankhya says, that the manifestation of nature is for the soul; all 
combinations are for some third person. The combinations which you call 
nature, these constant changes are going on for the enjoyment of the soul, for its 
liberation, that it may gain all this experience from the lowest to the highest. 
When it has gained it, the soul finds it was never in nature, that it was entirely 
separate, that it is indestructible, that it cannot go and come; that going to 
heaven and being born again were in nature, and not in the soul. Thus the soul 
becomes free. All nature is working for the enjoyment and experience of the 
soul. It is getting this experience in order to reach the goal, and that goal is 
freedom. But the souls are many according to the Sankhya philosophy. There is 
an infinite number of souls. The other conclusion of Kapila is that there is no 
God as the Creator of the universe. Nature is quite sufficient by itself to account 
for everything. God is not necessary, says the Sankhya. 

The Vedanta says that the Soul is in its nature Existence absolute. Knowledge 
absolute. Bliss absolute. But these are not qualities of the Soul: they are one, not 
three, the essence of the Soul; and it agrees with the Sankhya in thinking that 
intelligence belongs to nature, inasmuch as it comes through nature. The 
Vedanta also shows that what is called intelligence is a compound. For instance, 
let us examine our perceptions. I see a black-board. How does the knowledge 


come? What the German philosophers call "the thing-in-itself" of the 
blackboard is unknown, I can never know it. Let us call it x. The black-board x 
acts on my mind, and the mind reacts. The mind is like a lake. Throw a stone in 
a lake and a reactionary wave comes towards the stone; this wave is not like the 
stone at all, it is a wave. The black-board x is like a stone which strikes the mind 
and the mind throws up a wave towards it, and this wave is what we call the 
black-board. I see you. You as reality are unknown and unknowable. You are x 
and you act upon my mind, and the mind throws a wave in the direction from 
which the impact comes, and that wave is what I call Mr. or Mrs. So-and-so. 
There are two elements in the perception, one coming from outside and the 
other from inside, and the combination of these two, x + mind, is our external 
universe. All knowledge is by reaction. In the case of a whale it has been 
determined by calculation how long after its tail is struck, its mind reacts and 
the whale feels the pain. Similar is the case with internal perception. The real 
self within me is also unknown and unknowable. Let us call it y. When I know 
myself as so-and-so, it is y -i- the mind. That y strikes a blow on the mind. So our 
whole world is v -i- mind (external), and y -i- mind (internal), x and y standing for 
the thing-in-itself behind the external and the internal worlds respectively. 

According to Vedanta, the three fundamental factors of consciousness are, I 
exist, I know, and I am blessed The idea that I have no want, that I am restful, 
peaceful, that nothing can disturb me, which comes from time to time, is the 
central fact of our being, the basic principle of our life; and when it becomes 
limited, and becomes a compound, it manifests itself as existence phenomenal, 
knowledge phenomenal, and love. Every man exists, and every man must know, 
and every man is mad for love. He cannot help loving. Through all existence, 
from the lowest to the highest, all must love. The y, the internal thing-in-itself, 
which, combining with mind, manufactures existence, knowledge, and love, is 
called by the Vedantists. Existence absolute. Knowledge absolute. Bliss 
absolute. That real existence is limitless, unmixed, uncombined, knows no 
change, is the free soul; when it gets mixed up, muddled up, as it were, with the 
mind, it becomes what we call individual existence. It is plant life, animal life, 
human life, just as universal space is cut off in a room, in ajar, and so on. And 
that real knowledge is not what we know, not intuition, nor reason, nor instinct. 
When that degenerates and is confused, we call it intuition; when it degenerates 
more, we call it reason; and when it degenerates still more, we call it instinct. 


That knowledge itself is Vijnana, neither intuition, nor reason nor instinct. The 
nearest expression for it is all-knowingness. There is no limit to it, no 
combination in it. That bliss, when it gets clouded over, we call love, attraction 
for gross bodies or fine bodies, or for ideas. This is only a distorted 
manifestation of that blessedness. Absolute Existence, absolute Knowledge, and 
absolute Blessedness are not qualities of the soul, but the essence; there is no 
difference between them and the soul. And the three are one; we see the one 
thing in three different aspects. They are beyond all relative knowledge. That 
eternal knowledge of the Self percolating through the brain of man becomes his 
intuition, reason, and so on. Its manifestation varies according to the medium 
through which it shines. As soul, there is no difference between man and the 
lowest animal, only the latter's brain is less developed and the manifestation 
through it which we call instinct is very dull. In a man the brain is much finer, 
so the manifestation is much clearer, and in the highest man it becomes entirely 
clear. So with existence; the existence which we know, the limited sphere of 
existence, is simply a reflection of that real existence which is the nature of the 
soul. So with bliss; that which we call love or attraction is but the rejection of 
the eternal blessedness of the Self. With manifestation comes limitation, but the 
unmanifested, the essential nature of the soul, is unlimited; to that blessedness 
there is no limit. But in love there is limitation. I love you one day, I hate you 
the next. My love increases one day and decreases the next, because it is only a 
manifestation. 

The first point we will contend with Kapila is his idea of God. Just as the series 
of modifications of Prakriti, beginning with the individual intellect and ending 
with the individual body, require a Purusha behind, as the ruler and governor, 
so, in the Cosmos, the universal intellect, the universal egoism, the universal 
mind, all universal fine and gross materials, must have a ruler and governor. 
How will the cosmic series become complete without the universal Purusha 
behind them all as the ruler and governor? If you deny a universal Purusha 
behind the cosmic series, we deny your Purusha behind the individual series. If 
it be true that behind the series of graded, evolved individual manifestations, 
there stands One that is beyond them all, the Purusha who is not composed of 
matter, the very same logic will apply to the case of universal manifestations. 
This Universal Self which is beyond the universal modifications of Prakriti is 
what is called Ishwara, the Supreme Ruler, God. 


Now comes the more important point of difference. Can there be more than one 
Purusha? The Purusha, we have seen, is omnipresent and infinite. The 
omnipresent, the infinite, cannot be two. If there are two infinites A and B, the 
infinite A would limit the infinite B, because the infinite B is not the infinite A, 
and the infinite A is not the infinite B. Difference in identity means exclusion, 
and exclusion means limitation. Therefore, A and B, limiting each other, cease 
to be infinites. Hence, there can be but one infinite, that is, one Purusha. 

Now we will take up our x and y and show they are one. We have shown how 
what we call the external world isx + mind, and the internal world y + mind; x 
and y are both quantities unknown and unknowable. All difference is due to 
time, space, and causation. These are the constituent elements of the mind. No 
mentality is possible without them. You can never think without time, you can 
never imagine anything without space, and you can never have anything without 
causation. These are the forms of the mind. Take them away, and the mind itself 
does not exist. All difference is, therefore, due to the mind. According to 
Vedanta, it is the mind, its forms, that have limited x and y apparently and made 
them appear as external and internal worlds. But v and y, being both beyond the 
mind, are without difference and hence one. We cannot attribute any quality to 
them, because qualities are born of the mind. That which is qualityless must be 
one; x is without qualities, it only takes qualities of the mind; so does y; 
therefore these x and y are one. The whole universe is one. There is only one 
Self in the universe, only One Existence, and that One Existence, when it passes 
through the forms of time, space, and causation, is called by different names, 
Buddhi, fine matter, gross matter, all mental and physical forms. Everything in 
the universe is that One, appearing in various forms. When a little part of it 
comes, as it were, into this network of time, space, and causation, it takes forms; 
take off the network, and it is all one. Therefore in the Advaita philosophy, the 
whole universe is all one in the Self which is called Brahman. That Self when it 
appears behind the universe is called God. The same Self when it appears 
behind this little universe, the body, is the soul. This very soul, therefore, is the 
Self in man. There is only one Purusha, the Brahman of the Vedanta; God and 
man, analysed, are one in It. The universe is you yourself, the unbroken you; 
you are throughout the universe. "In all hands you work, through all mouths you 
eat, through all nostrils you breathe through all minds you think." The whole 
universe is. you; the universe is your body; you are the universe both formed 


and unformed. You are the soul of the universe and its body also. You are God, 
you are the angels, you are man, you are animals, you are the plants, you are the 
minerals, you are everything; the manifestation of everything is you. Whatever 
exists is you. You are the Infinite. The Infinite cannot be divided. It can have no 
parts, for each part would be infinite, and then the part would be identical with 
the whole, which is absurd. Therefore the idea that you are Mr. So-and-so can 
never be true; it is a day-dream. Know this and be free. This is the Advaita 
conclusion. "I am neither the body, nor the organs, nor am I the mind; I am 
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss absolute; I am He." This is true knowledge; all 
reason and intellect, and everything else is ignorance. Where is knowledge for 
me, for I am knowledge itself! Where is life for me, for I am life itself! I am 
sure I live, for I am life, the One Being, and nothing exists except through me, 
and in me, and as me. I am manifested through the elements, but I am the free 
One. Who seeks freedom? Nobody. If you think that you are bound, you remain 
bound; you make your own bondage. If you know that you are free, you are free 
this moment. This is knowledge, knowledge of freedom. Freedom is the goal of 
all nature. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Practical Vedanta and other lectures / 


THE GOAL 

{Delivered in San Francisco, March 27, 1900) 

(Reprinted from the Vedanta and the West, May-June 1958. The editors of the Magazine 
published it as it was recorded, adding certain words (in square brackets) to maintain the 
continuity of thought, and periods to indicate omissions that might have occurred in recording. 
— Ed.) 

We find that man, as it were, is always surrounded by something greater than 
himself, and he is trying to grasp the meaning of this. Man will ever [seek] the 
highest ideal. He knows that it exists and that religion is the search after the 
highest ideal. At first all his searches were in the external plane — placed in 
heaven, in different places — just according to [his grasp] of the total nature of 
man. 

[Later,] man began to look at himself a little closer and began to find out that 
the real "me" was not the "me" that he stands for ordinarily. As he appears to 
the senses is not the same as he really is. He began to [search] inside of 
himself, and found out that. .. the same ideal he [had placed] outside of 
himself is all the time within; what he was worshipping outside was his own 
real inner nature. The difference between dualism and monism is that when the 
ideal is put outside [of oneself], it is dualism. When God is [sought] within, it is 
monism. 

First, the old question of why and wherefore . .. How is it that man became 
limited? How did the Infinite become finite, the pure become impure? In the 
first place, you must never forget that this question can never be answered [by] 
any dualistic hypothesis. 

Why did God create the impure universe? Why is man so miserable, made by a 
perfect, infinite, merciful Father? Why this heaven and earth, looking at which 
we get our conception of law? Nobody can imagine anything that he has not 


seen. 








All the tortures we feel in this life, we put in another place and that is our hell. 


Why did the infinite God make this world? [The dualist says:] Just as the potter 
makes pots. God the potter; we the pots.... In more philosophical language the 
question is: How is it taken for granted that the real nature of man is pure, 
perfect, and infinite? This is the one difficulty found in any system of monism. 
Everything else is clean and clear. This question cannot be answered. The 
monists say the question itself is a contradiction. 

Take the system of dualism — the question is asked why God created the 
world. This is contradictory. Why? Because — what is the idea of God? He is a 
being who cannot be acted upon by anything outside. 

You and I are not free. I am thirsty. There is something called thirst, over 
which I have no control, [which] forces me to drink water. Every action of my 
body and even every thought of my mind is forced out of me. I have got to do 
it. That is why I am bound .... I am forced to do this, to have this, and so on . . 
. . And what is meant by why and wherefore? [Being subject to external 
forces.] Why do you drink water? Because thirst forces you. You are a slave. 
You never do any. thing of your own will because you slyc forced to do 
everything. Your only motive for action is some force.. .. 

The earth, by itself, would never move unless something forced it. Why does 
the light burn? It does not burn unless somebody comes and strikes a match. 
Throughout nature, everything is bound. Slavery, slavery! To be in harmony 
with nature is [slavery]. What is there in being the slave of nature and living in 
a golden cage? The greatest law and order is in the [knowledge that man is 
essentially free and divine] Now we see that the question why and wherefore 
can only be asked [in ignorance]. I can only be forced to do something through 
something else. 

[You say] God is free. Again you ask the question why God creates the world. 
You contradict yourself. The meaning of God is entirely free will. The question 
put in logical language is this: What forced Him, who can never be forced by 
anybody, to create the world? You say in the same question. What forced Him? 



The question is nonsense. He is infinite by His very nature; He is free. We shall 
answer questions when you can ask them in logical language. Reason will tell 
you that there is only one Reality, nothing else. Wherever dualism has risen, 
monism came to a head and drove it out. 

There is only one difficulty in understanding this. Religion is a common-sense, 
everyday thing. The man in the street knows it if you put it in his language and 
not [if it is put] in a philosopher's language. It is a common thing in human 
nature to [project itself]. Think of your feeling with the child. [You identify 
yourself with it. Then] you have two bodies. [Similarly] you can feel through 
your husband's mind Where can you stop? You can feel in infinite bodies. 

Nature is conquered by man every day. As a race, man is manifesting his 
power. Try in imagination to put a limit to this power in man. You admit that 
man as a race has infinite power, has [an] infinite body. The only question is 
what you are. Are you the race or one [individual]? The moment you isolate 
yourself, everything hurts you. The moment you expand and feel for others, 
you gain help. The selfish man is the most miserable in the world. The happiest 
is the man who is not at all selfish. He has become the whole creation, the 
whole race and God [is] within him.... So in dualism — Christian, Hindu, and 
all religions — the code of ethics .... is: Do not be selfish .... things for 
others! Expand! .... 

The ignorant can be made to understand [this] very easily, and the learned can 
be made to understand still more easily. But the man who has just got a speck 
of learning, him God himself cannot make understand. [The truth is,] you are 
not separate [from this universe]; Just as your Spirit] is [not] separate from the 
rest of you. If [not] so, you could not see anything, could not feel anything. Our 
bodies are simply little whirlpools in the ocean of matter. Life is taking a turn 
and passing on, in another form .... The sun, the moon, the stars, you and I are 
mere whirlpools. Why did I select [a particular mind as mine? It is] simply a 
mental whirlpool in the ocean of mind. 

How else is it possible that my vibration reaches you just now? If you throw a 
stone in the lake, it raises a vibration and [that stirs] the water into vibration. I 
throw my mind into the state of bliss and the tendency is to raise the same bliss 




in your mind. How often in your mind or heart [you have thought something] 
and without [verbal] communication, [others have got your thought]? 
Everywhere we are one. .. . That is what we never understand. The whole 
[universe] is composed of time, space, and causation. And God [appears as this 
universe]. .. . When did nature begin? When you [forgot your true nature and] 
became [bound by time, space, and causation]. 

This is the [rotating] circle of your bodies and yet that is your infinite nature. .. 

. That is certainly nature — time, space, and causation. That is all that is meant 
by nature. Time began when you began to think. Space began when you got the 
body; otherwise there cannot be any space. Causation began when you became 
limited. We have to have some sort of answer. There is the answer. [Our 
limitation] is play. Just for the fun of it. Nothing binds you; nothing forces 
[you. You were] never bound. We are all acting our parts in this [play] of our 
own invention. 

But let us bring another question about individuality. Some people are so afraid 
of losing their individuality. Wouldn't it be better for the pig to lose his pig- 
individuality if he can become God? Yes. But the poor pig does not think so at 
the time. Which state is my individuality? When I was a baby sprawling on the 
floor trying to swallow my thumb? Was that the individuality I should be sorry 
to lose? Fifty years hence I shall look upon this present state and laugh, just as I 
[now] look upon the baby state. Which of these individualities shall I keep ? . . 


We are to understand what is meant by this individuality.. .. [There are two 
opposite tendencies:] one is the protection of the individuality, the other is the 
intense desire to sacrifice the individuality.. .. The mother sacrifices all her 
own will for the needy baby.. .. When she carries the baby in her arms, the 
call of individuality, of self-preservation is no more heard. She will eat the 
worst food, but her children will have the best. So for all the people we love we 
are ready to die. 

[On the one hand] we are struggling hard to keep up this individuality; on the 
other hand, trying to kill it. With what result? Tom Brown may struggle hard. 
He is [fighting] for his individuality. Tom dies and there is not a ripple 


anywhere upon the surface of the earth. There was a Jew born nineteen hundred 
years ago, and he never moved a finger to keep his individuality.. .. Think of 
that! That Jew never struggled to protect his individuality. That is why he 
became the greatest in the world. This is what the world does not know. 

In time we are to be individuals. But in what sense? What is the individuality of 
man? Not Tom Brown, but God in man. That is the [true] individuality. The 
more man has approached that, the more he has given up his false individuality. 
The more he tries to collect and gain everything [for himself], the less he is an 
individual. The less he has thought of [himself], the more he has sacrificed all 
individuality during his lifetime,.. . the more he is an individual. This is one 
secret the world does not understand. 

We must first understand what is meant by individuality. It is attaining the 
ideal. You are man now, [or] you are woman. You will change all the time. 

Can you stop? Do you want to keep your minds as they are now — the angels, 
hatreds, jealousies, quarrels, all the thousand and one things in the mind? Do 
you mean to say that you will keep them? ... You cannot stop anywhere . . . 
until perfect conquest has been achieved, until you are pure and you are 
perfect. 

You have no more anger when you are all love, bliss, infinite existence. .. . 
Which of your bodies will you keep? You cannot stop anywhere until you 
come to life that never ends. Infinite life! You stop there. You have a little 
knowledge now and are always trying to get more. Where will you stop? 
Nowhere, until you become one with life itself.. .. 

Many want pleasure [as] the goal. For that pleasure they seek only the senses. 
On the higher planes much pleasure is to be sought. Then on spiritual planes. 
Then in himself — God within him. The man whose pleasure is outside of 
[himself] becomes unhappy when that outside thing goes. You cannot depend 
for this pleasure upon anything in this universe. If all my pleasures are in 
myself, I must have pleasure there all the time because I can never lose my 
Self. . .. Mother, father, child, wife, body, wealth — everything I can lose 
except my self. .. bliss in the Self All desire is contained in the Self. .. . This, 
is individuality which never changes, and this is perfect. 



. .. And how to get it? They find what the great souls of this world — all great 
men and women — found [through sustained discrimination]. . . . What of 
these dualistic theories of twenty gods, thirty gods? It does not matter. They all 
had the one truth, that this false individuality must go. .. . So this ego — the 
less there is of it, the nearer I am to that which I really am: the universal body. 
The less I think of my own individual mind, the nearer I am to that universal 
mind. The less I think of my own soul, the nearer I am to the universal soul. 

We live in one body. We have some pain, some pleasure. Just for this little 
pleasure we have by living in this body, we are ready to kill everything in the 
universe to preserve ourselves. If we had two bodies, would not that be much 
better? So on and on to bliss. I am in everybody. Through all hands I work; 
through all feet I walk. I speak through every mouth; I live in every body. 
Infinite my bodies, infinite my minds. I lived in Jesus of Nazareth, in Buddha, 
in Mohammed — in all the great and good of the past, of the present. I am 
going to live in all that [may] come afterwards. Is that theory [No, it is the 
truth.] 

If you can realise this, how infinitely more pleasurable that will be. What an 
ecstasy of joy! Which one body is so great that we need here anything [of] the 
body. .. After living in all the bodies of others, all the bodies there are in this 
world, what becomes of us? [We become one with the Infinite. And] that is the 
goal. That is the only way. One [man] says, "If I know the truth, I shall be 
melted away like butter." I wish people would be, but they are too tough to be 
melted so quickly! 

What are we to do to be free? Free you are already. .. . How could the free ever 
be bound? It is a lie. [You were] never bound. How could the unlimited ever be 
limited by anything? Infinite divided by infinite, added to infinite, multiplied 
by infinite [remains] infinite. You are infinite; God is infinite. You are all 
infinite. There cannot be two existences, only one. The Infinite can never be 
made finite. You are never bound. That is all.... You are free already. You 
have reached the goal — all there is to reach. Never allow the mind to think 
that you have not reached the goal. .. . 

Whatever we [think] that we become. If you think you are poor sinners you 






hypnotise yourselves: "I am a miserable, crawling worm." Those who believe 
in hell are in hell when they die; those who say that they will go to heaven [go 
to heaven]. 

It is all play. ... [You may say,] "We have to do something; let us do good." 
[But] who cares for good and evil? Play! God Almighty plays. That is all.. . 
.You are the almighty God playing. If you want to play on the side and take the 
part of a beggar, you are not [to blame someone else for making that choice]. 
You enjoy being the beggar. You know your real nature [to be divine]. You are 
the king and play you are a beggar. ... It is all fun. Know it and play. That is 
all there is to it. Then practice it. The whole universe is a vast play. All is good 
because all is fun. This star comes and crashes with our earth, and we are all 
dead. [That too is fun.] You only think fun the little things that delight your 
senses! .. . 

[We are told that there is] one good god here, and one bad god there always on 
the watch to grab me the moment I make a mistake. .. . When I was a child I 
was told by someone that God watches everything. I went to bed and looked up 
and expected the ceiling of the room to open. [Nothing happened.] Nobody is 
watching us except ourselves. No Lord except our [own Self]; no nature but 
what we feel. Habit is second nature; it is first nature also. It is all there is of 
nature. I repeat [something] two or three times; it becomes my nature. Do not 
be miserable! Do not repent! What is done is done. If you burn yourself, [take 
the consequences]. 

. .. Be sensible. We make mistakes; what of that? That is all in fun. They go so 
crazy over their past sins, moaning and weeping and all that. Do not repent! 
After having done work, do not think of it. Go on! Stop not! Don't look back! 
What will you gain by looking back? You lose nothing, gain nothing. You are 
not going to be melted like butter. Heavens and hells and incarnations — all 
nonsense! 

Who is born and who dies? You are having fun, playing with worlds and all 
that. You keep this body as long as you like. If you do not like it, do not have 
it. The Infinite is the real; the finite is the play. You are the infinite body and 
the finite body in one. Know it! But knowledge will not make any difference; 



the play will go on. . .. Two words — soul and body — have been joined. 
[Partial] knowledge is the cause. Know that you are always free. The fire of 
knowledge burns down all the [impurities and limitations]. I am that Infinite.. . 


You are as free as you were in the beginning, are now, and always will be. He 
who knows that he is free is free; he who knows that he is bound is bound. 

What becomes of God and worship and all that? They have their place. I have 
divided myself into God and me; I become the worshipped and I worship 
myself. Why not? God is I. Why not worship my Self? The universal God — 
He is also my Self. It is all fun. There is no other purpose. 

What is the end and aim of life? None, because I [know that I am the Infinite]. 
If you are beggars, you can have aims. I have no aims, no want, no purpose. I 
come to your country, and lecture — just for fun. No other meaning. What 
meaning can be there? Only slaves do actions for somebody else. You do 
actions for nobody else. When it suits you, you worship. You can join the 
Christians, the Mohammedans, the Chinese, the Japanese. You can worship all 
the gods that ever were and are ever going to be. .. . 

I am in the sun, the moon, and the stars. I am with God and I am in all the gods. 
I worship my Self. 

There is another side to it. I have kept it in reserve. I am the man that is going 
to be hanged. I am all the wicked. I am getting punished in hells. That [also] is 
fun. This is the goal of philosophy [to know that I am the Infinite]. Aims, 
motives, purposes, and duties live in the background. .. . 

This truth is first to be listened to then to be thought about. Reason, argue it out 
by all manner of means. The enlightened know no more than that. Know it for 
certain that you are in everything. That is why you should not hurt anybody, 
because in hurting them you hurt yourself. .. . [Lastly,] this is to be meditated 
upon. Think upon it. Can you realise there will come a time when everything 
will crumble in the dust and you will stand alone? That moment of ecstatic joy 
will never leave you. You will actually find that you are without bodies. You 
never had bodies. 





I am One, alone, through all eternity. Whom shall I fear? It is all my Self. This 
is continuously to be meditated upon. Through that comes realisation. It is 
through realisation that you become a [blessing] to others. . .. 

"Thy face shines like [that of] one who has known God." (Chhandogya. IV. ix. 2.) 
That is the goal. This is not to be preached as I am doing. "Under a tree I saw a 
teacher, a boy of sixteen; the disciple was an old man of eighty. The teacher 
was teaching in silence, and the doubts of the disciple vanished." 
{Dakshindmurtistotram, 12.) And who Speaks? Who lights a candle to see the sun? 
When the truth [dawns], no witness is necessary. You know it.... That is 
what you are going to do: .. . realise it. [first think of it. Reason it out. Satisfy 
your curiosity. Then [think] of nothing else. I wish we never read anything. 
Lord help us all! Just see what [a learned] man becomes. 

"This is said, and that is said...." 

"What do you say, my friend?" 

"I say nothing." [He quotes] everybody else's thought; but he thinks nothing. If 
this is education, what is lunacy? Look at all the men who wrote! .. . These 
modern writers, not two sentences their own! All quotations. .. . 

There is not much value in books, and in [secondhand] religion there is no 
value whatsoever. It is like eating. Your religion would not satisfy me Jesus 
saw God and Buddha saw God. If you have not seen God, you are no better 
than the atheist. Only he is quiet, and you talk much and disturb the world with 
your talk. Books and bibles and scriptures are of no use. I met an old man when 
I was a boy; [he did not study any scripture, but he transmitted the truth of God 
by a touch]. 

Silence ye teachers of the world. Silence ye books. Lord, Thou alone speak and 
Thy servant listeneth. ... If truth is not there, what is the use of this life? We 
all think we will catch it, but we do not. Most of us catch only dust. God is not 
there. If no God, what is the use of life? Is there any resting-place in the 
universe? [It is up to us to find it]; only we do not [search for it intensely. We 


are] like a little piece of maw carried on in the current. 

If there is this truth, if there is God, it must be within us. ... [I must be able to 
say,] "I have seen Him with my eyes," Otherwise I have no religion. Beliefs, 
doctrines, sermons do not make religion. It is realisation, perception of God 
[which alone is religion]. What is the glory of all these men whom the world 
worships? God was no more a doctrine [for them. Did they believe] because 
their grandfather believed it? No. It was the realisation of the Infinite, higher 
than their own bodies, minds, and everything. This world is real inasmuch as it 
contains a little bit [of] the reflection of that God. We love the good man 
because in his face shines the reflection a little more. We must catch it 
ourselves. There is no other way. 

That is the goal. Struggle for it! Have your own Bible. Have your own Christ. 
Otherwise you are not religious. Do not talk religion. Men talk and talk. "Some 
of them, steeped in darkness, in the pride of their hearts think that they have the 
light. And not only [that], they offer to take others upon their shoulders and 
both fall into the pit." (Katha, 1. ii. 5.) . . . 

No church ever saved by itself. It is good to be born in a temple, but woe unto 
the person who dies in a temple or church. Out of it! ... It was a good 
beginning, but leave it! It was the childhood place .. . but let it be! ... Go to 
God directly. No theories, no doctrines. Then alone will all doubts vanish. Then 
alone will all crookedness be made straight.. .. 

In the midst of the manifold, he who sees that One; in the midst of this infinite 
death, he who sees that one life; in the midst of the manifold, he who sees that 
which never changes in his own soul — unto him belongs eternal peace. 


» 


Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda 

Volume 2 

Reports in American Newspapers 

Note 

Divinity of Man 

Swami Vivekananda on India 

Religious Harmony 

From far off India 

An Evening with our Hindu Cousins 

The Manners and Customs of India 

The Religions of India 
Sects and Doetrines in India 

Less Doctrine and more Bread 

The Religion of Buddha 

All Religions are Good 

The Hindu way of life 

Ideals of Womanhood 

True Buddhism 



















India's Gift to the World 


Child Widows of India 


Some Customs of the Hindus 





Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


« 

NOTE 

These reports from American newspapers have been given exactly as they were 
in the original. The wrong spellings of proper names, faulty punctuation and 
grammar have been left uncorrected. — Publisher. 


» 







« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


DIVINITY OF MAN 

{Ada Record, February 28, 1894) 

The lecture on the Divinity of Man by Swami Vive Kananda, (In the earlier days 
Swam! Vivekananda's name was thus mis-spelt by the American Press. — Publisher.) the 
Hindu monk, drew a packed house at the Opera last Friday evening [February 
22 ]. 

He stated that the fundamental basis of all religions was belief in the soul 
which is the real man, and something beyond both mind and matter, and 
proceeded to demonstrate the proposition. The existence of things material are 
dependent on something else. The mind is mortal because changeable. Death is 
simply a change. 

The soul uses the mind as an instrument and through it affects the body. The 
soul should be made conscious of its powers. The nature of man is pure and 
holy but it becomes clouded. In our religion every soul is trying to regain its 
own nature. The mass of our people believe in the individuality of the soul. We 
are forbidden to preach that ours is the only true religion. Continuing the 
speaker said: "I am a spirit and not matter. The religion of the West hopes to 
again live with their body. Ours teaches there can not be such a state. We say 
freedom of the soul instead of salvation." The lecture proper lasted but 30 
minutes but the president of the lecture committee had announced that at the 
close of the lecture the speaker would answer any questions propounded him. 
He gave that opportunity and liberal use was made of the privilege. They came 
from preachers and professors, physicians and philosophers, from citizens and 
students, from saints and sinners, some were written but dozens arose in their 
seats and propounded their questions directly. The speaker responded to all — 
mark the word, please — in an affable manner and in several instances turned 
the laugh on the inquirer. They kept up the fusilade for nearly an hour; when 
the speaker begged to be excused from further labor there yet remained a large 
pile of unanswered questions. He was an artful dodger on many of the 
questions. From his answers we glean the following additional statements in 
regard to the Hindu belief and teachings: They believe in the incarnation of 








man. One of their teachings is to the effect that their God Krishna was born of a 
virgin about 5000 years ago in the North of India. The story is very similar to 
the Biblical history of Christ, only their God was accidently killed. They 
believe in evolution and the transmigration of souls: i.e. our souls once 
inhabited some other living thing, a bird, fish or animal, and on our death will 
go into some other organism. In reply to the inquiry where these souls were 
before they came into this world he said they were in other worlds. The soul is 
the permanent basis of all existence. There was no time when there was no 
God, therefore no time when there was no creation. Buddhists [sic] do not 
believe in a personal god; I am no Buddhist. Mohammed is not worshipped in 
the same sense as Christ. Mohammed believes in Christ but denies he is God. 
The earth was peopled by evolution and not special selection [creation]. God is 
the creator and nature the created. We do not have prayer save for the children 
and then only to improve the mind. Punishment for sin is comparatively 
immediate. Our actions are not of the soul and can therefore be impure. It is our 
spirit that becomes perfect and holy. There is no resting place for the soul. It 
has no material qualities. Man assumes the perfect state when he realizes he is 
a spirit. Religion is the manifestation of the soul nature. The deeper they see is 
what makes one holier than another. Worship is feeling the holiness of God. 

Our religion does not believe in missions and teaches that man should love God 
for love's sake and his neighbor in spite of himself. The people of the West 
struggle too hard; repose is a factor of civilization. We do not lay our 
infirmities to God. There is a tendency toward a union of religions. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


SWAMIVIVEKANANDA ON INDIA 

(Bay City Daily Tribune, March 21, 1894) 

Bay City had a distinguished visitor yesterday in the person of Swami Vive 
Kananda, the much talked of Hindoo monk. He arrived at noon from Detroit 
where he has been the guest of Senator Palmer and proceeded immediately to 
the Fraser house. There he was seen by a reporter for The Tribune. 

Kananda spoke entertainingly of his country and his impressions of this 
country. He came to America via the Pacific and will return via the Atlantic. 
"This is a great land," he said, "but I wouldn't like to live here. Americans think 
too much of money. They give it preference over everything else. Your people 
have much to learn. When your nation is as old as ours you will be wiser. I like 
Chicago very much and Detroit is a nice place." 

Asked how long he intended remaining in America, he replied: "I do not know. 
I am trying to see most of your country. I go east next and will spend some 
time at Boston and New York. I have visited Boston but not to stay. When I 
have seen America I shall go to Europe. I am very anxious to visit Europe. I 
have never been there." 

Concerning himself the easterner said he was 30 years old. He was born at 
Calcutta and educated at a college in that city. His profession calls him to all 
parts of the country, and he is at all times the guest of the nation. India has a 
population of 285,000,000," he said. "Of these about 65,000,000 are 
Mohammedans and most of the others Hindoos. There are only about 600,000 
Christians in the country, and of these at least 250,000 are Catholics. Our 
people do not, as a rule, embrace Christianity; they are satisfied with their own 
religion. Some go into Christianity for mercenary motives. They are free to do 
as they wish. We say let everybody have his own faith. We are a cunning 
nation. We do not believe in bloodshed. There are wicked men in our country 
and they are in the majority, same as in your country. It is unreasonable to 
expect people to be angels." 






Vive Kananda will lecture in Saginaw to-night 


LECTURE LAST NIGHT 

The lower floor of the opera house was comfortably filled when the lecture 
began last evening. Promptly at 8:15 o'clock Swami Vive Kananda made his 
appearance on the stage, dressed in his beautiful oriental costume. He was 
introduced in a few words by Dr. C. T. Newkirk. 

The first part of the discourse consisted of an explanation of the different 
religions of India and of the theory of transmigration of souls. In connection 
with the latter, the speaker said it was on the same basis as the theory of 
conservation was to the scientist. This latter theory, he said, was first produced 
by a philosopher of his country. They did not believe in a creation. A creation 
implied making something out of nothing. That was impossible. There was no 
beginning of creation, just as there was no beginning of time. God and creation 
are as two lines — without end, without beginning, without [?] parallel. Their 
theory of creation is, "It is, was, and is to be." They think all punishment is but 
re-action. If we put our hand in the fire it is burned. That is the re-action of the 
action. The future condition of life is determined by the present condition. They 
do not believe God punishes. "You, in this land," said the speaker, "praise the 
man who does not get angry and denounce the man who does become angry. 
And yet thousands of people throughout this country are every day accusing 
God of being angry. Everybody denounces Nero, who sat and played on his 
instrument while Rome was burning, and yet thousands of your people are 
accusing God of doing the same thing today." 

The Hindoos have no theory of redemption in their religion. Christ is only to 
show the way. Every man and woman is a divine being, but covered as though 
by a screen, which their religion is trying to remove. The removal of that 
Christians call salvation, they, freedom. God is the creator, preserver, and 
destroyer of the universe. 

The speaker then sought to vindicate the religions of his country. He said it had 
been proven that the entire system of the Roman Catholic Church had been 
taken from the books of Buddhism. The people of the west should learn one 



thing from India — toleration. 

Among other subjects which he held up and overhauled were: The Christian 
missionaries, the zeal of the Presbyterian church and its non-toleration, the 
dollar-worshipping in this country, and the priests. The latter he said were in 
the business for the dollars there were in it, and wanted to know how long they 
would stay in the church if they had to depend on getting their pay from God. 
After speaking briefly on the Caste system in India, our civilization in the 
south, our general knowledge of the mind, and various other topics the speaker 
concluded his remarks. 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


RELIGIOUS HARMONY 

{Saginaw Evening News, March 22, 1894) 

Swami Vive Kananda, the much talked of Hindoo monk, spoke to a small but 
deeply interested audience last evening at the academy of music on "The 
Harmony of Religions". He was dressed in oriental costume and received an 
extremely cordial reception. Hon. Rowland Connor gracefully introduced the 
speaker, who devoted the first portion of his lecture to an explanation of the 
different religions of India and of the theory of transmigration of souls. The 
first invaders of India, the Aryans, did not try to exterminate the population of 
India as the Christians have done when they went into a new land, but the 
endeavour was made to elevate persons of brutish habits. The Hindoo is 
disgusted with those people of his own country who do not bathe and who eat 
dead animals. The Northern people of India have not tried to force their 
customs on the southerns, but the latter gradually adopted many ways of the 
former class. In southernmost portions of India there are a few persons who are 
Christians and who have been so for thousands [?] of years. The Spaniards 
came to Ceylon with Christianity. The Spaniards thought that their God 
commanded them to kill and murder and to tear down heathen temples. 

If there were not different religions no one religion would survive. The 
Christian needs his selfish religion. The Hindoo needs his own creed. Those 
which were founded on a book still stand. Why could not the Christian convert 
the Jew? Why could they not make the Persians Christians? Why not so with 
the Mohammedans? Why cannot any impression be made upon China or 
Japan? The Buddhists, the first missionary religion, have double the number of 
converts of any other religion and they did not use the sword. The 
Mohammedans used the most force, and they number the least of the three 
great missionary, religions. The Mohammedans have had their day. Every day 
you read of Christian nations acquiring land by bloodshed. What missionaries 
preach against this? Why should the most bloodthirsty nations exalt an alleged 
religion which is not the religion of Christ? The Jews and the Arabs were the 
fathers of Christianity, and how have they been persecuted by the Christians! 
The Christians have been weighed in the balance in India and found wanting. 






The speaker did not wish to be unkind, but he wanted to show Christians how 
they looked in other eyes. The Missionaries who preach the burning pit are 
regarded with horror. The Mohammedans rolled wave after wave over India, 
waving the sword, and today where are they? The farthest that all religions can 
see is the existence of a spiritual entity. So no religion can teach beyond this 
point. In every religion there is the essential truth and nonessential casket in 
which this jewel lies. The believing in the Jewish book or the Hindoo book is 
non-essential. Circumstances change, the receptacle is different; but the central 
truth remains. The essentials being the same, the educated people of every 
community retain the essentials. The shell of the oyster is not attractive, but the 
pearls are within. Before a small fraction of the world is converted Christianity 
will be divided into many creeds. That is the law of nature. Why take a single 
instrument from the great religious orchestras of the earth? Let the grand 
symphony go on. Be pure, urged the speaker, give up superstition and see the 
wonderful harmony of nature. Superstition gets the better of religion. All the 
religions are good since the essentials are the same. Each man should have the 
perfect exercise of his individuality but these individualities form a perfect 
whole. This marvellous condition is already in existence. Each creed has had 
something to add to the wonderful structure. 

The speaker sought throughout to vindicate the religions of his country and said 
that it had been proven that the entire system of the Roman Catholic Church 
had been taken from the books of Buddhism. He dilated at some length on the 
high code of morality and purity of life that the ethics of Buddha taught but 
allowed that as far as the belief in the personality of God was concerned, 
agnosticism prevailed, the main thing being to follow out Buddha's precepts 
which were, "Be good, be moral, be perfect." 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


FROM FAR OFF INDIA 

(Saginaw Courier-Herald, March 22, 1894) 

Seated in the lobby of the Hotel Vincent yesterday evening was a strong and 
regular featured man of fine presence, whose swarthy skin made more 
pronounced the pearly whiteness of his even teeth. Under a broad and high 
forehead his eyes betoken intelligence. This gentleman was Swami Vive 
Kananda, the Hindoo preacher. Mr. Kananda's conversation is in pure and 
grammatically constructed English sentences, to which his slightly foreign 
accent lends piquancy. Readers of the Detroit papers are aware that Mr. 
Kananda has lectured in that city a number of times and aroused the animosity 
of some on account of his strictures upon Christians. The Courier-Herald 
representative had a few moments' conversation with the learned Buddhist [?] 
just before he left for the Academy, where he was to lecture. Mr. Kananda said 
in conversation that he was surprised at the lapses from the paths of rectitude 
which were so common among Christians, but that there was good and bad to 
be found among members of all religious bodies. One statement he made was 
decidedly un-American. Upon being asked if he had been investigating our 
institutions, he replied: "No, I am a preacher only." This displayed both a want 
of curiosity and narrowness, which seemed foreign to one who appeared to be 
so well versed upon religious topics as did the Buddhist [?] preacher. 

From the hotel to the Academy was but a step and at 8 o'clock Rowland 
Connor introduced to a small audience the lecturer, who was dressed in a long 
orange colored robe, fastened by a red sash, and who wore a turban of windings 
of what appeared to be a narrow shawl. 

The lecturer stated at the opening that he had not come as a missionary, and 
that it was not the part of a Buddhist to convert others from their faiths and 
beliefs. He said that the subject of his address would be, "The Harmony of 
Religions". Mr. Kananda said that many ancient religions had been founded, 
and were dead and gone. 

He said that the Buddhists [Hindus] comprise two-thirds of the race, and that 






the other third comprised those of all other believers. He said that the Buddhists 
have no place of future torment for men. In that they differ from the Christians, 
who will forgive a man for five minutes in this world and condemn him to 
everlasting punishment in the next. Buddha was the first to teach the universal 
brotherhood of man. It is a cardinal principle of the Buddhist faith today. The 
Christian preaches it, but does not practice its own teachings. 

He instanced the condition of the Negro in the South, who is not allowed in 
hotels nor to ride in the same cars with white men, and is a being to whom no 
decent man will speak. He said that he had been in the South, and spoke from 
his knowledge and observation. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


AN EVENING WITH OUR HINDU COUSINS 

{Northampton Daily Herald, April 16, 1894) 

For Swami Vive Kananda proved conclusively that all our neighbors across the 
water, even the remotest, are our close cousins differing only a trifle in color, 
language, customs and religion, the silver-tongued Hindu monk prefacing his 
address in city hall Saturday evening [April 14] by an historic sketch of the 
origin of his own and all other leading nations of the earth which demonstrated 
the truth that race-kinship is more of a simple fact than many know or always 
care to admit. 

The informal address that followed regarding some of the customs of the Hindu 
people was more of the nature of a pleasant parlor talk, expressed with the easy 
freedom of the conversational adept, and to those of his hearers possessing a 
natural and cultivated interest in the subject both the man and his thought were 
intensely interesting for more reasons than can be given here. But to others the 
speaker was disappointing in not covering a larger scope in his word-pictures, 
the address, although extremely lengthy for the American lecture-platform, 
referring to very few of the "customs and manners" of the peculiar people 
considered, and of whose personal, civil, home, social and religious life much 
more would have been gladly heard from this one of the finest representatives 
of this oldest of races, which the average student of human nature should find 
preeminently interesting but really knows the least about. 

The allusions to the life of the Hindu began with a picture of the birth of the 
Hindu boy, his introduction to educational training, his marriage, slight 
reference to the home life but not what was expected, the speaker diverging 
frequently to make comparative comments on the customs and ideas of his own 
and English-speaking races, socially, morally and religiously, the inference in 
all cases being clearly in favor of his own, although most courteously, kindly 
and gracefully expressed. Some of his auditors who are tolerably well posted as 
to social and family conditions among the Hindoos of all classes would have 
liked to have asked the speaker a challenging question or two on a good many 
of the points he touched upon. For instance, when he so eloquently and 






beautifully portrayed the Hindu idea of womanhood as the divine motherhood 
ideal, to be forever reverenced, even worshipped with a devotion of loyalty 
such as the most woman-respecting unselfish and truest of American sons, 
husbands and fathers cannot even conceive of, one would have liked to know 
what the reply would have been to the query as to how far this beautiful theory 
is exemplified in practice in the majority of Hindu homes, which hold wives, 
mothers, daughters and sisters. 

The rebuke to the greed for gain, the national vice of luxury-seeking, self- 
seeking the "dollar-caste" sentiment which taints the dominant white European 
and American races to their mortal danger, morally and civilly, was only too 
just and superbly well-put, the slow, soft, quiets unimpassioned musical voice 
embodying its thought with all the power and fire of the most vehement 
physical utterance, and went straight to the mark like the "Thou art the man" of 
the prophet. But when this learned Hindu nobleman by birth, nature and culture 
attempts to prove — as he repeatedly did in his frequent and apparently half¬ 
unconscious digressions from the special point under consideration — that the 
distinctively self-centred, self-cultivating, preeminently self-soulsaving, 
negative and passive, not to say selfishly indolent religion of his race has 
proven itself superior in its usefulness to the world to the vitally aggressive, 
self-forgetful, do-good unto-others-first-last-and-always, go-ye-into-all-the- 
world and work religion which we call Christianity, in whose name nine tenths 
of all the really practical moral, spiritual and philanthropic work of the world 
has been and is being done, whatever sad and gross mistakes have been made 
by its unwise zealots, he attempts a large contract. 

But to see and hear Swami Vive Kananda is an opportunity which no 
intelligent fair-minded American ought to miss if one cares to see a shining 
light of the very finest product of the mental, moral and spiritual culture of a 
race which reckons its age by thousands where we count ours by hundreds and 
is richly worth the study of every mind. 

Sunday afternoon [April 15] the distinguished Hindu spoke to the students of 
Smith college at the vesper service, the Fatherhood of God and the 
Brotherhood of man being, virtually, his theme, and that the address made a 
deep impression is evinced by the report of every auditor, the broadest 




liberality of true religious sentiment and precept characterizing the whole trend 
of thought. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF INDIA 

{Boston Herald, May 15, 1894) 

Association Hall was crowded with ladies yesterday, to hear Swami 
Vivekananda, the Brahmin (Meaning Hindu. — Publisher.) Monk talk about "The 
Religion of India" [actually "The Manners and Customs of India"], for the 
benefit of the ward 16 day nursery [actually, Tyler-street Day Nursery]. The 
Brahmin monk has become a fad in Boston, as he was in Chicago last year, and 
his earnest, honest, cultured manner has won many friends for him. 

The Hindoo nation is not given to marriage, he said, not because we are women 
haters, but because our religion teaches us to worship women. The Hindoo is 
taught to see in every woman his mother, and no man wants to marry his 
mother. God is mother to us. We don't care anything about God in heaven; it is 
mother to us. We consider marriage a low vulgar state, and if a man does 
marry, it is because he needs a helpmate for religion. 

You say we ill-treat our women. What nation in the world has not ill-treated its 
women? In Europe or America a man can marry a woman for money, and, after 
capturing her dollars, can kick her out. In India, on the contrary, when a woman 
marries for money, her children are considered slaves, according to our 
teaching, and when a rich man marries, his money passes into the hands of his 
wife, so that he would be scarcely likely to turn the keeper of his money out of 
doors. 

You say we are heathens, we are uneducated, uncultivated, but we laugh in our 
sleeves at your want of refinement in telling us such things. With us, quality 
and birth make caste, not money. No amount of money can do anything for you 
in India. In caste the poorest is as good as the richest, and that is one of the 
most beautiful things about it. 

Money has made warfare in the world, and caused Christians to trample on 
each other's necks. Jealousy, hatred and avariciousness are born of money- 
getters. Here it is all work, hustle and bustle. Caste saves a man from all this. It 






makes it possible for a man to live with less money, and it brings work to all. 
The man of caste has time to think of his soul; and that is what we want in the 
society of India. 

The Brahmin is born to worship God, and the higher his caste, the greater his 
social restrictions are. Caste has kept us alive as a nation, and while it has many 
defects, it has many more advantages. 

Mr. Vivekananda described the universities and colleges of India, both ancient 
and modern, notably the one at Benares, that has 20,000 students and 
professors. 

When you judge my religion, he continued, you take it that yours is perfect and 
mine wrong; and when you criticise the society of India you suppose it to be 
uncultured just so far as it does not conform to your standard. That is nonsense. 

In reference to the matter of education, the speaker said that the educated men 
of India become professors, while the less educated become priests. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


THE RELIGIONS OF INDIA 

{Boston Herald, May 17, 1894) 

The Brahmin monk, Swami Vivekananda, lectured yesterday afternoon in 
Association Hall on "The Religions of India", in aid of the Ward 16 Day 
Nursery. There was a large attendance. 

The speaker first gave an account of the Mahommedans, who formed, he said, 
one-fifth of the population. They believed in both Old and New Testaments, 
but Jesus Christ they regarded only as a prophet. They had no church 
organization, though there was reading of the Koran. 

The Parsees, another race, called their sacred book the Zend-Avesta, and 
believed in two warring deities, Armuzd the good and Ahriman the evil. They 
believed that finally the good would triumph over the evil. Their moral code 
was summed up in the words: "Good thought, good words, good deeds." 

The Hindus proper looked up to the Vedas as their religious scripture. They 
held each individual to the customs of caste, but gave him full liberty to think 
for himself in religious matters. A part of their method was to seek out some 
holy man or prophet in order to take advantage of the spiritual current that 
flowed through him. 

The Hindus had three different schools of religion — the dualistic, the qualified 
monistic and the monistic — and these three were regarded as stages through 
which each individual naturally passed in the course of his religious 
development. 

All three believed in God, but the dualistic school believed that God and man 
were separate entities, while the monistic declared that there was only one 
existence in the universe, this unitary existence teeing neither God nor soul, but 
something beyond. 

The lecturer quoted from the Vedas to show the character of the Hindu religion. 








and declared that, to find God, one must search one's own heart. 

Religion did not consist of pamphlets or books; it consisted of looking into the 
human heart, and finding there the truths of God and immortality. 

"Whomsoever I like," said the Vedas, "him I create a prophet," and to be a 
prophet was all there was of religion. 

The speaker brought his lecture to a close by giving an account of the Jains, 
who show remarkable kindness to dumb animals, and whose moral law is 
summed up in the words: "Not to injure others is the highest good." 

» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


SECTS AND DOCTRINES IN INDIA 

{Harvard Crimson, May 17, 1894) 

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindoo monk, gave an address last evening in Sever 
Hall under the auspices of the Harvard Religious Union. The address was very 
interesting, the clear and eloquent voice of the speaker, and his low, earnest 
delivery making his words singularly impressive. 

There are various sects and doctrines in India, said Vivekananda, some of 
which accept the theory of a personal God, and others which believe that God 
and the universe are one; but whatever sect the Hindoo belongs to he does not 
say that his is the only right belief, and that all others must be wrong. He 
believes that there are many ways of coming to God; that a man who is truly 
religious rises above the petty quarrels of sects or creed. In India if a man 
believes that he is a spirit, a soul, and not a body, then he is said to have 
religion and not till then. 

To become a monk in India it is necessary to lose all thought of the body; to 
look upon other human beings as souls. So monks can never marry. Two vows 
are taken when a man becomes a monk, poverty and chastity. He is not allowed 
to receive or possess any money whatever. The first ceremony to be performed 
enjoining the order is to be burnt in effigy, which supposed to destroy once for 
all the old body, name and caste. The man then receives a new name, and is 
allowed to go forth and preach or travel, but must take no money for what he 
does. 


» 






« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


LESS DOCTRINE AND MORE BREAD 

{Baltimore American, October 15, 1894) 

The Lyceum Theater was crowded last night at the first of a series of meetings 
by the Vrooman Brothers. The subject discussed was "Dynamic Religion". 

Swami Vivekananda, the high priest [?] from India, was the last speaker. He 
spoke briefly, and was listened to with marked attention. His English and his 
mode of delivery were excellent. There is a foreign accent to his syllables, but 
not enough to prevent him from being plainly understood. He was dressed in 
the costume of his native country, which was decidedly picturesque. He said he 
could speak but briefly after the oratory that had preceded him, but he could 
add his endorsement to all that had been said. He had traveled a great deal, and 
preached to all kinds of people. He had found that the particular kind of 
doctrine preached made little difference. What is wanted is practical sort of 
work. If such ideas could not be carried out, he would lose his faith in 
humanity. The cry all over the world is "less doctrine and more bread". He 
thought the sending of missionaries to India all right; he had no objections to 
offer, but he thought it would be better to send fewer men and more money. So 
far as India was concerned, she had religious doctrine to spare. Living up to the 
doctrines was needed more than more doctrines. The people of India, as well as 
the people all over the world, had been taught to pray, but prayer with the lips 
was not enough; people should pray with their hearts. "A few people in the 
world," he said, "really try to do good. Others look on and applaud, and think 
that they themselves have done great good. Life is love, and when a man ceases 
to do good to others, he is dead spiritually." 

On Sunday evening next Swami Vivekananda will make the address of the 
evening at the Lyceum. 


{Sun, October 15, 1894) 


Vivekananda sat on the stage last night with imperturbable stolidity until it 






came his turn to speak. Then his manner changed and he spoke with force and 
feeling. He followed the Vrooman brothers and said there was little to add to 
what had been said save his testimony as a "man from the Antipodes". 

"We have doctrines enough," he continued. "What we want now is practical 
work as presented in these speeches. When asked about the missionaries sent to 
India I reply all right. But we want money more and men less. India has 
bushels full of doctrines and to spare. What is wanted is the means to carry 
them out. 

"Prayer may be done in different ways. Prayer with the hands is yet higher than 
prayer with the lips and is more saving. 

"All religions teach us to do good for our brothers. Doing good is nothing 
extraordinary — it is the only way to live. Everything in nature tends to 
expansion for life and contraction for death. It is the same in religion. Do good 
by helping others without ulterior motives. The moment this ceases contraction 
and death follow." 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


THE RELIGION OF BUDDHA 

{Morning Herald, October 22, 1894) 

An audience which filled the Lyceum Theatre [Baltimore] from pit to dome 
assembled last night at the second of the series of meetings held by the 
Vrooman Brothers in the interest of "Dynamic Religion". Fully 3,000 persons 
were present. Addresses were made by the Rev. Hiram Vrooman, Rev. Walter 
Vrooman and Rev. Swarri Vivekananda, the Brahmin High Priest now visiting 
this city. The speakers of the evening were seated on the stage, the Rev. 
Vivekananda being an object of particular interest to all. He wore a yellow 
turban and a red robe tied in at the waste [sic] with a sash of the same color, 
which added to the Oriental cast of his features and invested him with a 
peculiar interest. His personality seemed to be the feature of the evening. His 
address was delivered in an easy, unembarrassed manner, his diction being 
perfect and his accent similar to that of a cultured member of the Latin race 
familiar with the English language. He said in part: 

THE HIGH PRIEST SPEAKS 

"Buddha began to found the religion of India 600 years before the birth of 
Christ He found the religion of India at that time mainly engaged in eternal 
discussions upon the nature of the human soul. There was no remedy according 
to the ideas then prevailing for the cure of religious ills but sacrifices of 
animals, sacrificial altars and similar methods. 

"In the midst of this system a priest [?] was born who was a member of one of 
the leading families who was the founder of Buddhism. His was, in the first 
place, not the founding of a new religion, but a movement of reformation. He 
believed in the good of all. His religion, as formulated by him, consisted of the 
discovery of three things: First, 'There is an evil'; second, 'What is the cause of 
this evil?' This he ascribed to the desires of men to be superior to others, an evil 
that could be cured by unselfishness. Third, 'This evil is curable by becoming 
unselfish'. Force, he concluded, could not cure it; dirt cannot wash dirt; hate 






cannot cure hate. 


"This was the basis of his religion. So long as society tries to cure human 
selfishness by laws and institutions whose aim is to force others to do good to 
their neighbors, nothing can be done. The remedy is not to place trick against 
trick and force against force. The only remedy is in making unselfish men and 
women. You may enact laws to cure present evils, but they will be of no avail. 

"Buddha found in India too much talking about God and His essence and too 
little work. He always insisted upon this fundamental truth, that we are to be 
pure and holy, and that we are to help others to be holy also. He believed that 
man must go to work and help others; find his soul in others; find his life in 
others. He believed that in the conjunction of doing good to others is the only 
good we do ourselves, [sic] He believed that there was always in the world too 
much theory and too little practice. A dozen Buddhas in India at the present 
time would do good, and one Buddha in this country would also be beneficial. 

"When there is too much doctrine, too much belief in my father's religion, too 
much rational superstition, a change is needed. Such doctrine produces evil, 
and a reformation is necessary." 

At the conclusion of Mr. Vivekananda's address there was a hearty burst of 
applause. 


{Baltimore American, October 22, 1894) 

The Lyceum Theater was crowded to the doors last night at the second meeting 
of the series conducted by the Vrooman brothers on "Dynamic Religion". 
Swami Vivekananda, of India, made the principal address. He spoke on the 
Buddhist religion, and told of the evils which existed among the people of 
India, at the time of the birth of Buddha. The social inequalities in India, he 
said, were at that period a thousand times greater than anywhere else in the 
world. "Six hundred years before Christ," he continued, "the priesthood of 
India exercised great influence over the minds of the people, and between the 
upper and nether millstone of intellectuality and learning the people were 


ground. Buddhism, which is the religion of more than two-third of the human 
family, was not founded as an entirely new religion, but rather as a reformation 
which carried off the corruption of the times. Buddha seems to have been the 
only prophet who did everything for others and absolutely nothing for himself. 
He gave up his home and all the enjoyments of life to spend his days in search 
of the medicine for the terrible disease of human misery. In an age when men 
and priests were discussing the essence of the deity, he discovered what people 
had overlooked, that misery existed. The cause of evil is our desire to be 
superior to others and our selfishness. The moment that the world becomes 
unselfish all evil will vanish. So long as society tries to cure evil by laws and 
institutions, evil will not be cured. The world has tried this method 
ineffectually for thousands of years. Force against force never cures, and the 
only cure for evil is unselfishness. We need to teach people to obey the laws 
rather than to make more laws. Buddhism was the first missionary religion of 
the world but it was one of the teachings of Buddhism not to antagonize any 
other religion. Sects weaken their power for good by making war on each 
other." 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


ALL RELIGIONS ARE GOOD 

{Washington Post, October 29, 1894) 

Mr. Kananda spoke yesterday at the People's Church on the invitation of Dr. 
Kent, pastor of the church. His talk in the morning was a regular sermon, 
dealing entirely with the spiritual side of religion, and presenting the, to 
orthodox sects, rather original proposition that there is good in the foundation 
of every religion, that all religions, like languages, are descended from a 
common stock, and that each is good in its corporal and spiritual aspects so 
long as it is kept free from dogma and fossilism. The address in the afternoon 
was more in the form of a lecture on the Aryan race, and traced the descent of 
the various allied nationalities by their language, religion and customs from the 
common Sanskrit stock. 

After the meeting, to a Post reporter Mr. Kananda said: "I claim no affiliation 
with any religious sect, but occupy the position of an observer, and so far as I 
may, of a teacher to mankind. All religion to me is good. About the higher 
mysteries of life and existence I can do no more than speculate, as others do. 
Reincarnation seems to me to be the nearest to a logical explanation for many 
things with which we are confronted in the realm of religion. But I do not 
advance it as a doctrine. It is no more than a theory at best, and is not 
susceptible of proof except by personal experience, and that proof is good only 
for the man who has it. Your experience is nothing to me, nor mine to you. I 
am not a believer in miracles — they are repugnant to me in matters of religion. 
You might bring the world tumbling down about my ears, but that would be no 
proof to me that there was a God, or that you worked by his agency, if there 
was one. 


HE BELIEVES IT BLINDLY 

"I must, however, believe in a past and a hereafter as necessary to the existence 
of the present. And if we go on from here, we must go in other forms, and so 
comes any belief in reincarnation. But I can prove nothing, and any one is 






welcome to deprive me of the theory of reincarnation provided they will show 
me something better to replace it. Only up to the present I have found nothing 
that offers so satisfactory an explanation to me." 

Mr. Kananda is a native of Calcutta, and a graduate of the government 
university there. He speaks English like a native, having received his university 
training in that tongue. He has had good opportunity to observe the contact 
between the native and the English, and it would disappoint a foreign 
missionary worker to hear him speak in very unconcerned style of the attempts 
to convert the natives. In this connection he was asked what effect the Western 
teaching was having on the thought of the Orient. 

"Of course," he said, "no thought of any sort can come into a country without 
having its effect, but the effect of Christian teaching on Oriental thought is, if it 
exists, so small as to be imperceptible. The Western doctrines have made about 
as much impression there as have the Eastern doctrines here, perhaps not so 
much. That is, among the higher thinkers of the country. The effect of the 
missionary work among the masses is imperceptible. When converts are made 
they of course drop at once out of the native sects, but the mass of the 
population is so great that the converts of the missionaries have very little 
effect that can be seen." 


THE YOGIS ARE JUGGLERS 

When asked whether he knew anything of the alleged miraculous performances 
of the yogis and adepts Mr. Kananda replied that he was not interested in 
miracles, and that while there were of course a great many clever jugglers in 
the country, their performances were tricks. Mr. Kananda said that he had seen 
the mango trick but once, and then by a fakir on a small scale. He held the 
same view about the alleged attainments of the lamas. "There is a great lack of 
trained, scientific, and unprejudiced observers in all accounts of these 
phenomena," said he, "so that it is hard to select the false from the true." 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


THE HINDU VIEW OF LIFE 

{Brooklyn Times, December 31, 1894) 

The Brooklyn Ethical Association, at the Pouch Gallery last night, tendered a 
reception to Swami Vivekananda.. .. Previous to the reception the 
distinguished visitor delivered a remarkably interesting lecture on "The 
Religions of India". Among other things he said: 

"The Hindoo's view of life is that we are here to learn; the whole happiness of 
life is to learn; the human soul is here to love learning and get experience. I am 
able to read my Bible better by your Bible, and you will learn to read your 
Bible the better by my Bible. If there is but one religion to be true, all the rest 
must be true. The same truth has manifested itself in different forms, and the 
forms are according to the different circumstances of the physical or mental 
nature of the different nations. 

"If matter and its transformation answer for all that we have, there is no 
necessity for supposing the existence of a soul. But it can [not] be proven that 
thought has been evolved out of matter. We can not deny that bodies inherit 
certain tendencies, but those tendencies only mean the physical configuration 
through which a peculiar mind alone can act in a peculiar way. These peculiar 
tendencies in that soul have been caused by past actions. A soul with a certain 
tendency will take birth in a body which is the fittest instrument for the display 
of that tendency, by the laws of affinity. And this is in perfect accord with 
science, for science wants to explain everything by habit, and habit is got 
through repetitions. So these repetitions are also necessary to explain the 
natural habits of a new-born soul. They were not got in this present life; 
therefore, they must have come down from past lives. 

"All religions are so many stages. Each one of them represents the stage 
through which the human soul passes to realize God. Therefore, not one of 
them should be neglected. None of the stages are dangerous or bad. They are 
good. Just as a child becomes a young man, and a young man becomes an old 
man, so they are travelling from truth to truth; they become dangerous only 






when they become rigid, and will not move further — when he ceases to grow. 
If the child refuses to become an old man, then he is diseased, but if they 
steadily grow, each step will lead them onward until they reach the whole truth. 
Therefore, we believe in both a personal and impersonal God, and at the same 
time we believe in all the religions that were, all the religions that are, and all 
the religions that will be in the world. We also believe we ought not only 
tolerate these religions, but to accept them. 

"In the material physical world, expansion is life, and contraction is death. 
Whatever ceases to expand ceases to live. Translating this in the moral world 
we have: If one would expand, he must love, and when he ceases to love he 
dies. It is your nature; you must, because that is the only law of life. Therefore, 
we must love God for love's sake, so we must do our duty for duty's sake; we 
must work for work's sake without looking for any reward — know that you 
are purer and more perfect, know that this is the real temple of God." 


{Brooklyn Daily Eagle, December 31, 1894) 

After referring to the views of the Mohammedans, the Buddhists and other 
religious schools of India, the speaker said that the Hindoos received their 
religion through the revelations of the Vedas, who teach that creation is without 
beginning or end. They teach that man is a spirit living in a body. The body 
will die, but the man will not. The spirit will go on living. The soul was not 
created from nothing for creation means a combination and that means a certain 
future dissolution. If then the soul was created it must die. Therefore, it was not 
created. He might be asked how it is that we do not remember anything of our 
past lives. This could be easily explained. Consciousness is the name only of 
the surface of the mental ocean, and within its depths are stored up all our 
experiences. The desire was to find out something that was stable. The mind, 
the body, all nature, in fact, is changing. This question of finding something 
that was infinite had long been discussed. One school of which the modern 
Buddhists are the representatives, teach that everything that could not be solved 
by the five senses was nonexistent. That every object is dependent upon all 
others, that it is a delusion that man is an independent entity. The idealists, on 
the other hand, claim that each individual is an independent body. The true 



solution of this problem is that nature is a mixture of dependence and 
independence, of reality and idealism. There is a dependence which is proved 
by the fact that the movements of our bodies are controlled by our minds, and 
our minds are controlled by the spirit within us, which Christians call the soul. 
Death is but a change. Those who have passed beyond and are occupying high 
positions there are but the same as those who remain here, and those who are 
occupying lower positions there are the same as others here. Every human 
being is a perfect being. If we sit down in the dark and lament that it is so dark 
it will profit us nothing, but if we procure matches and strike a light, the 
darkness goes out immediately. So, if we sit down and lament that our bodies 
are imperfect, that our souls are imperfect, we are not profited. When we call in 
the light of reason, then this darkness of doubt will disappear. The object of life 
is to learn. Christians can learn from the Hindus, and the Hindus from 
Christians. He could read his Bible better after reading ours. "Tell your 
children," he said, "that religion is a positive something, and not a negative 
something. It is not the teachings of men, but a growth, a development of 
something higher within our nature that seeks outlet. Every child born into the 
world is born with a certain accumulated experience. The idea of independence 
which possesses us shows there is something in us besides mind and body. The 
body and mind are dependent. The soul that animates us is an independent 
factor that creates this wish for freedom. If we are not free how can we hope to 
make the world good or perfect? We hold that we are makers of ourselves, that 
what we have we make ourselves. We have made it and we can unmake it. We 
believe in God, the Eather of us all, the Creator and Preserver of His children, 
omnipresent and omnipotent. We believe in a personal God, as you do, but we 
go further. We believe that we are He. We believe in all the religions that have 
gone before, in all that now exist and in all that are to come. The Hindu bows 
down to the all religion [sic] for in this world the idea is addition, not 
subtraction. We would make up a bouquet of all beautiful colors for God, the 
Creator, who is a personal God. We must love Cod for love's sake, we must do 
our duty to Him for duty's sake, and must work for Him for work's sake and 
must worship Him for worship's sake. 

"Books are good but they are only maps. Reading a book by direction of a man 
I read that so many inches of rain fell during the year. Then he told me to take 
the book and squeeze it between my hands. I did so and not a drop of water 


came from it. It was the idea only that the book conveyed. So we can get good 
from books, from the temple, from the church, from anything, so long as it 
leads us onward and upward. Sacrifices, genuflections, rumblings and 
mutterings are not religion. They are all good if they help us to come to a 
perception of the perfection which we shall realize when we come face to face 
with Christ. These are words or instructions to us by which we may profit. 
Columbus, when he discovered this continent, went back and told his 
countrymen that he had found the new world. They would not believe him, or 
some would not, and he told them to go and search for themselves. So with us, 
we read these truths and come in and find the truths for ourselves and then we 
have a belief which no one can take from us." 

After the lecture an opportunity was given those present to question the speaker 
on any point on which they wished to have his views. Many of them availed 
themselves of this offer. (See Complete Works, Vol. V. in the Section, "Questions and 
Answers" .) 


» 




« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


IDEALS OF WOMANHOOD 

{Brooklyn Standard Union, January 21, 1895) 

Swami Vivekananda, after being presented to the audience by Dr. Janes, 
president of the Ethical Association, said in part: 

"The product of the slums of any nation cannot be the criterion of our judgment 
of that nation. One may collect the rotten, worm-eaten apples under every apple 
tree in the world, and write a book about each of them, and still know nothing 
of the beauty and possibilities of the apple tree. Only in the highest and best 
can we judge a nation — the fallen are a race by themselves. Thus it is not only 
proper, but just and right, to judge a custom by its best, by its ideal. 

"The ideal of womanhood centres in the Arian race of India, the most ancient in 
the worlds history. In that race, men and women were priests, 'sabatimini [saha- 
dharmini],' or co-religionists, as the Vedas call them. There every family had 
its hearth or altar, on which, at the time of the wedding, the marriage fire was 
kindled, which was kept alive, until either spouse died, when the funeral pile 
was lighted from its spark. There man and wife together offered their sacrifices, 
and this idea was carried so far that a man could not even pray alone, because it 
was held that he was only half a being, for that reason no unmarried man could 
become a priest. The same held true in ancient Rome and Greece. 

"But with the advent of a distinct and separate priest-class, the co-priesthood of 
the woman in all these nations steps back. First it was the Assyrian race, 
coming of Semitic blood, which proclaimed the doctrine that girls have no 
voice, and no right, even when married. The Persians drank deep of this 
Babylonian idea, and by them it was carried to Rome and to Greece, and 
everywhere woman degenerated. 

"Another cause was instrumental in bringing this about — the change in the 
system of marriage. The earliest system was a matriarchal one; that is, one in 
which the mother was the centre, and in which the girls acceded to her station. 
This led to the curious system of the Polianders [polyandrous], where five and 








six brothers often married one wife. Even the Vedas contain a trace of it in the 
provision, that when a man died without leaving any children, his widow was 
permitted to live with another man, until she became a mother; but the children 
she bore did not belong to their father, but to her dead husband. In later years 
the widow was allowed to marry again, which the modern idea forbids her to 
do. 

"But side by side with these excrescences a very intense idea of personal purity 
sprang up in the nation. On every page the Vedas preach personal purity. The 
laws in this respect were extremely strict. Every boy and girl was sent to the 
university, where they studied until their twentieth or thirtieth year; there the 
least impurity was punished almost cruelly. This idea of personal purity has 
imprinted itself deeply into the very heart of the race, amounting almost to a 
mania. The most conspicuous example of it is to be found in the capture of 
Chito [Chitor] by the Mohammedans. The men defended the town against 
tremendous odds; and when the women saw that defeat was inevitable they lit a 
monstrous fire on the market place, and when the enemy broke down the gates 
74,500 women jumped on the huge funeral pile and perished in the flames. 

This noble example has been handed down in India to the present time, when 
every letter bears the words 74,500,' which means that any one who unlawfully 
reads the letter, thereby becomes guilty of a crime similar to the one which 
drove those noble women of Chito to their death. 

"The next period is that of the monks; it came with the advent of Buddhism, 
which taught that only the monks could reach the 'nirvana', something similar 
to the Christian heaven. The result was that all India became one huge 
monastery; there was but one object, one battle — to remain pure. All the 
blame was cast onto women, and even the proverbs warned against them. 

'What is the gate to hell?' was one of them, to which the answer was: 'Woman'. 
Another read: 'What is the chain which binds us all to dust? Woman'. Another 
one: 'Who is the blindest of the blind? He who is deceived by woman.' 

"The same idea is to be found in the cloisters of the West. The development of 
all monasticism always meant the degeneration of women. 

"But eventually another idea of womanhood arose. In the West it found its 



ideal in the wife, in India in the mother. But do not think that the priests were 
altogeher responsible for this change. I know they always lay claim to 
everything in the world and I say this, although I am myself a priest. I'll bend 
my knees to every prophet in every religion and clime, but candor compels me 
to say, that here in the West the development of women was brought about by 
men like John Stuart Mill and the revolutionary French philosophers. Religion 
has done something, no doubt, but not all. Why, in Asia Minor, Christian 
bishops to this day keep a harem! 

"The Christian ideal is that which is found in the Anglo-Saxon race. The 
Mohammedan woman differs vastly from her western sisters in so far as her 
social and intellectual development is not so pronounced. But do not, on that 
account, think that the Mohammedan woman is unhappy, because it is not so. 
In India woman has enjoyed property rights since thousands of years. Here a 
man may disinherit his wife, in India the whole estate of the deceased husband 
must go to the wife, personal property absolutely, real property for life. 

"In India the mother is the centre of the family and our highest ideal. She is to 
us the representative of God, as God is the mother of the Universe. It was a 
female sage who first found the unity of God, and laid down this doctrine in 
one of the first hymns of the Vedas. Our God is both personal and absolute, the 
absolute is male, the personal, female. And thus it comes that we now say: 'The 
first manifestation of God is the hand that rocks the cradle.' He is of the 'arian' 
race, who is born through prayer, and he is a nonarian, who is born through 
sensuality. 

"This doctrine of prenatal influence is now slowly being recognized, and 
science as well as religion calls out: 'Keep yourself holy, and pure.' So deeply 
has this been recognized in India, that there we even speak of adultery in 
marriage, except when marriage is consummated in prayer. And I and every 
good Hindoo believe, that my mother was pure and holy, and hence I owe her 
everything that I am. That is the secret of the race — chastity." 


» 



« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


TRUE BUDDHISM 

{Brooklyn Standard Union, February 4, 1895) 

Swami Vivekananda, being presented by Dr. Janes, the president of the Ethical 
Association, under whose auspices these lectures are given, said in part: "The 
Hindoo occupies a unique position towards Buddhism. Like Christ, who 
antagonized the Jews, Buddha antagonized the prevailing religion of India; but 
while Christ was rejected by his countrymen, Buddha was accepted as God 
Incarnate. He denounced the priestcraft at the very doors of their temples, yet 
to-day he is worshipped by them. 

"Not, however, the creed which bears his name. What Buddha taught, the 
Hindoo believes, but what the Buddhists teach, we do not accept. For the 
teachings of the Great Master, spread out broadcast over the land, came back in 
tradition, colored by the channels through which they passed. 

"In order to understand Buddhism fully we must go-back to the mother religion 
from which it came. The books of Veda have two parts; the first, Cura makanda 
[Karma Kanda], contains the sacrificial portion, while the second part, the 
Vedanta, denounces sacrifices, teaching charity and love, but not death. Each 
sect took up what portion it liked. The charvaka, or materialist, basing his 
doctrine on the first part, believed that all was matter and that there is neither a 
heaven nor a hell, neither a soul nor a God. The second sect, the Gains [Jains], 
were very moral atheists, who, while rejecting the idea of a God, believed that 
there is a soul, striving for more perfect development. These two sects were 
called the heretics. A third sect was called orthodox, because it accepted the 
Vedas, although it denied the existence of a personal God, believing that 
everything sprang from the atom or nature. 

"Thus the intellectual world was divided before Buddha came. But for a correct 
understanding of his religion, it is also necessary to speak of the caste then 
existing. The Vedas teach that he who knows God is a Brahma [Brahmin]; he 
who protects his fellows is a Chocta [Kshatriya], while he who gains his 
livelihood in trade is a Visha [Vaishya]. These different social diversions 






[divisions] developed or degenerated into iron-bound casts [castes], and an 
organized and crystallized priestcraft stood upon the neck of the nation. At this 
time Buddha was born, and his religion is therefore the culmination of an 
attempt at a religious and a social reformation. 

"The air was full of the din of discussion; 20,000 blind priests were trying to 
lead 20,000,000 [?] blind men, fighting amongst themselves. What was more 
needed at that time than for a Buddha to preach? 'Stop quarreling, throw your 
books aside, be perfect!' Buddha never fought true castes, for they are nothing 
but the congregation of those of a particular natural tendency, and they are 
always valuable. But Buddha fought the degenerated castes with their 
hereditary privileges, and spoke to the Brahmins: 'True Brahmins are not 
greedy, nor criminal nor angry — are you such? If not, do not mimic the 
genuine, real men. Caste is a state, not an iron-bound class, and every one who 
knows and loves God is a true Brahmin.' And with regard to the sacrifices, he 
said: 'Where do the Vedas say that sacrifices make us pure? They may please, 
perhaps, the angels, but they make us no better. Hence, let off these 
mummeries — love God and strive to be perfect.' 

"In later years these doctrines of Buddha were forgotten. Going to lands yet 
unprepared for the reception of these noble truths, they came back tainted with 
the foibles of these nations. Thus the Nihilists arose — a sect whose doctrine it 
was that the whole universe, God and soul, had no basis, but that everything is 
continually changing. They believed in nothing but the enjoyment of the 
moment, which eventually resulted in the most revolting orgies. That, however, 
is not the doctrine of Buddha, but a horrible degeneration of it, and honor to the 
Hindoo nation, who stood up and drove it out. 

"Every one of Buddha's teachings is founded in the Vedantas. He was one of 
those monks who wanted to bring out the truths, hidden in those books and in 
the forest monasteries. I do not believe that the world is ready for them even 
now; it still wants those lower religions, which teach of a personal God. 
Because of this, the original Buddhism could not hold the popular mind, until it 
took up the modifications, which were reflected back from Thibet and the 
Tartars. Original Buddhism was not at all nihilistic. It was but an attempt to 
combat cast and priestcraft; it was the first in the world to stand as champion of 





the dumb animals, the first to break down the caste, standing between man and 
man." 

Swami Vivekananda concluded his lecture with the presentation of a few 
pictures from the life of Buddha, the 'great one, who never thought a thought 
and never performed a deed except for the good of others; who had the greatest 
intellect and heart, taking in all mankind and all the animals, all embracing, 
ready to give up his life for the highest angels as well as for the lowest worm." 
He first showed how Buddha, for the purpose of saving a herd of sheep, 
intended for a king's sacrifice, had thrown himself upon the altar, and thus 
accomplished his purpose. He next pictured how the great prophet had parted 
from his wife and baby at the cry of suffering mankind, and how, lastly, after 
his teachings had been universally accepted in India, he accepted the invitation 
of a despised Pariah, who dined him on swine's flesh, from the effects of which 
he died. 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


INDIA'S GIFT TO THE WORLD 

{Brooklyn Standard Union, February 27, 1895) 

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindoo monk, delivered a lecture Monday night 
under the auspices of the Brooklyn Ethical Association before a fairly large 
audience at the hall of the Long Island Historical Society, corner Pierrepont 
and Clinton streets. His subject was "India's Gift to the World". 

He spoke of the wondrous beauties of his native land, "where stood the earliest 
cradle of ethics, arts, sciences, and literature, and the integrity of whose sons 
and the virtue of whose daughters have been sung by all travelers." Then the 
lecturer showed in rapid details, what India has given to the world. 

"In religion," he said, "she has exerted a great influence on Christianity, as the 
very teachings of Christ would [could] be traced back to those of Buddha." He 
showed by quotations from the works of European and American scientists the 
many points of similarity between Buddha and Christ. The latter's birth, his 
seclusion from the world, the number of his apostles, and the very ethics of his 
teachings are the same as those of Buddha, living many hundred years before 
him. 

"Is it mere chance," the lecturer asked, "or was Buddha's religion but the 
foreshadowing of that of Christ? The majority of your thinkers seem to be 
satisfied in the latter explanation, but there are some bold enough to say that 
Christianity is the direct offspring of Buddhism just as the earliest heresy in the 
Christian religion — the Monecian [Manichaean] heresy — is now universally 
regarded as the teaching of a sect of Buddhists. But there is more evidence that 
Christianity is founded in Buddhism. We find it in recently discovered 
inscriptions from the reign of Emperor Oshoka [Asoka] of India, about 300 
B.C., who made treaties with all the Grecian kings, and whose missionaries 
discriminated [disseminated ?] in those very parts, where, centuries after, 
Christianity flourished, the principles of the Buddhistic religion. Thus it is 
explained, why you have our doctrine of trinity, of incarnation of God, and of 
our ethics, and why the service in our temples is so much alike to that in your 







present Catholic churches, from the mass to the chant and benediction. 
Buddhism had all these long before you. Now use your own judgment on these 
premise — we Hindoos stand ready to be convinced that yours is the earlier 
religion, although we had ours some three hundred years before yours was even 
thought of. 

"The same holds good with respect to sciences. India has given to antiquity the 
earliest scientifical physicians, and, according to Sir William Hunter, she has 
even contributed to modern medical science by the discovery of various 
chemicals and by teaching you how to reform misshapen ears and noses. Even 
more it has done in mathematics, for algebra, geometry, astronomy, and the 
triumph of modern science — mixed mathematics — were all invented in 
India, just so much as the ten numerals, the very cornerstone of all present 
civilization, were discovered in India, and are in reality, Sanskrit words. 

"In philosophy we are even now head and shoulders above any other nation, as 
Schopenhauer, the great German philosopher, has confessed. In music India 
gave to the world her system of notation, with the seven cardinal notes and the 
diatonic scale, all of which we enjoyed as early as 350 B.C., while it came to 
Europe only in the eleventh century. In philology, our Sanskrit language is now 
universally acknowledged to be the foundation of all European languages, 
which, in fact, are nothing but jargonized Sanskrit. 

"In literature, our epics and poems and dramas rank as high as those of any 
language; our 'Shaguntala' [Shakuntala] was summarized by Germany's 
greatest poet, as 'heaven and earth united'. India has given to the world the 
fables of Aesop, which were copied by Aesop from an old Sanskrit book; it has 
given the Arabian Nights, yes, even the story of Cinderella and the Bean Stalks. 
In manufacture, India was the first to make cotton and purple [dye], it was 
proficient in all works of jewelry, and the very word 'sugar', as well as the 
article itself, is the product of India. Lastly she has invented the game of chess 
and the cards and the dice. So great, in fact, was the superiority of India in 
every respect, that it drew to her borders the hungry cohorts of Europe, and 
thereby indirectly brought about the discovery of America. 

"And now, what has the world given to India in return for all that? Nothing but 


nullification [vilification] and curse and contempt. The world waded in her 
children's life-blood, it reduced India to poverty and her sons and daughters to 
slavery, and now it adds insult to injury by preaching to her a religion which 
can only thrive on the destruction of every other religion. But India is not 
afraid. It does not beg for mercy at the hands of any nation. Our only fault is 
that we cannot: fight to conquer; but we trust in the eternity of truth. India's 
message to the world is first of all, her blessing; she is returning good for the 
evil which is done her, and thus she puts into execution this noble idea, which 
had its origin in India. Lastly, India's message is, that calm goodness, patience 
and gentleness will ultimately triumph. For where are the Greeks, the onetime 
masters of the earth? They are gone. Where are the Romans, at the tramp of 
whose cohorts the world trembled? Passed away. Where are the Arabs, who in 
fifty years had carried their banners from the Atlantic to the Pacific? and where 
are the Spaniards, the cruel murderers of millions of men? Both races are 
nearly extinct; but thanks to the morality of her children, the kinder race will 
never perish, and she will yet see the hour of her triumph." 

At the close of the lecture, which was warmly applauded, Swami Vivekananda 
answered a number of questions in regard to the customs of India. He denied 
positively the truth of the statement published in yesterday's [February 25] 
Standard Union, to the effect that widows are ill-treated in India. The law 
guarantees her not only her own property, before marriage, but also all she 
received from her husband, at whose death, if there be no direct heirs, the 
property goes to her. Widows seldom marry in India, because of the scarcity of 
men. He also stated that the self-sacrifices of wives at the death of their 
husbands as well as the fanatical self-destruction under the wheels of the 
Juggernaut, have wholly stopped, and referred his hearers for proof to Sir 
William Hunter's "History of the Indian Empire". 


» 


« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


CHILD WIDOWS OF INDIA 

{Daily Eagle, February 27, 1895) 

Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu monk, lectured in Historical hall Monday night 
under the auspices of the Brooklyn Ethical association, on "India's Gift to the 
World". There were about two hundred and fifty people in the hall when the 
Swami stepped on the platform. Much interest was manifested on account of 
the denial by Mrs. James McKeen, president of the Brooklyn Ramabai circle, 
which is interested in Christian work in India, of the statement attributed to the 
lecture that the child widows of India were not protected [ill-treated]. In no part 
of his lecture was reference made to this denial, but after he had concluded, one 
of the audience asked the lecturer what explanation he had to make to the 
statement. Swami Vivekananda said that it was untrue that child widows were 
abused or ill treated in any way. He added: 

"It is a fact that some Hindus marry very young. Others marry when they have 
attained a fair age and some do not marry at all. My grandfather was married 
when quite a child. My father when he was 14 years old and I am 30 years old 
and am not yet married. When a husband dies all his possessions go to his 
widow. If a widow is poor she is the same as poor widows in any other country. 
Old men sometimes marry children, but if the husband was wealthy it was all 
the better for the widow the sooner he died. I have traveled all over India, but 
failed to see a case of the ill treatment mentioned. At one time there were 
religious fanatics, widows, who threw themselves into a fire and were 
consumed by the flames at the death of their husbands. The Hindus did not 
believe in this, but did not prevent it, and it was not until the British obtained 
control of India that it was finally prohibited. These women were considered 
saints and in many instances monuments were erected to their memory." 


» 






« 


Home / Complete-Works / Volume 2 / Reports in American Newspapers / 


SOME CUSTOMS OF THE HINDUS 

{Brooklyn Standard Union, April 8, 1895) 

A special meeting of the Brooklyn Ethical Association with an address by 
Swami Vivekananda, the Hindu monk as the main feature, was held at the 
Pouch Gallery, of Clinton avenue, last night. "Some customs of the Hindus 
what they mean, and how they are misinterpreted," was the subject treated. A 
large throng of people filled the spacious gallery. 

Dressed in his Oriental costume, his eyes bright, and a flush mantling his face, 
Swami Vivekananda started to tell of his people, of his country, and its 
customs. He desired only that justice be shown to him and to his. In the 
beginning of his discourse he said he would give a general idea of India. He 
said it was not a country but a continent; that erroneous ideas had been 
promulgated by travellers who had never seen the country. He said that there 
were nine separate languages spoken and over 100 different dialects. He spoke 
severely of those who wrote about his country, and said their brains were 
addled by superstition, and that they had an idea that everyone outside of the 
pale of their own religion was a horrible blackguard. One of the customs that 
had often been misinterpreted was the brushing of the teeth by the Hindus. 
They never put hair or skin in their mouths, but use a plant. "Hence a man 
wrote," said the speaker, "that the Hindus get up early in the morning and 
swallow a plant." He said the [custom of widows throwing themselves under 
the] car of juggernaut did not exist, never had, and that no one knew how such 
a story started. 

Swami Vivekananda's talk on caste was most comprehensive and interesting. 
He said it was not a granted [graded] system of classes, but that each caste 
thought itself to be superior to all the others. He said it was a trade guild and 
not a religious institution. He said that it had been in existence from time 
immemorial, and explained how at first only certain rights were hereditary, but 
how afterward the ties were bound closer, and intermarriage and eating and 
drinking were restricted to each caste. 






The speaker told of the effect that the mere presence of a Christian or 
Mohammedan would have on a Hindu household. He said that it was veritable 
pollution for a white man to step into a Hindu's presence, and that after 
receiving one outside of his religion, the Hindu always took a bath. 

The Hindu monk abused [?] the order of the Pariahs roundly, saying they did 
all the menial work, ate carrion and were the scavengers. He also said that the 
people who wrote books on India came only into contact with these people, and 
not with genuine Hindus. He described the trial of one who broke the rules of 
caste, and said that the only punishment inflicted was the refusal of the 
particular caste to intermarry or drink or eat with him or his children. All other 
ideas were erroneous. 

In explaining the defects of caste, the speaker said that in preventing 
competition it produced stagnation, and completely blocked the progress of the 
people. He said that in taking away brutality it stopped social improvements. In 
checking competition it increased population. In its favor, he said, were the 
facts that it was the only ideal of equality and fraternity. That money had 
nothing to do with social standing in the caste. All were equal. He said that the 
fault of all the great reformers was that they thought caste was due only to 
religious representation, instead of ascribing it to the right source, namely, the 
curious social conditions. He spoke very bitterly of the attempts of the English 
and Mohammedans to civilize the country by the bayonet and fire and sword. 
He said that to abolish caste one must change the social conditions completely 
ant destroy the entire economic system of the country. Better, he said, that the 
waves of the [Bay of] Bengal flow and drown all rather than this. English 
civilization was composed of the three "B's" — Bible, bayonet, and brandy. 
"That is civilization, and it has been carried to such an extent that the average 
income of a Hindu is 50 cents a month. Russia is outside, saying. 'Let's civilize 
a little,' and England goes on and on." 

The monk grew excited as he walked up and down, talking rapidly about the 
way the Hindus had been treated. He scored the foreign educated Hindus, and 
described their return to their native land, "full of champagne and new ideas". 
He said that child-marriage was bad, because the West said so, and that the 
mother-in-law could torture her daughter-in-law with impunity, as the son 



could not interfere. He said that the foreigners took every opportunity to abuse 
the heathen, because they had so many evils of their own that they wanted to 
cover them up. He said that each nation must work out its own salvation, and 
that no one else could solve its problems. 

In speaking of India's benefactors he asked whether America had ever heard of 
David Herr [Hare], who established the first college for women, and who had 
devoted so much of his life to education. 

The speaker gave a number of Indian proverbs that were not at all 
complimentary to the English. In closing he made an earnest appeal for his 
land. He said: 

"It matters not as long as India is true to herself and to her religion. But a blow 
has been struck at her heart by this awful godless West when she sends 
hypocrisy and atheism into her midst. Instead of sending bushels of abuses, 
carloads of vituperation and shiploads of condemnations, let an endless stream 
of love go forth. Let us all be men" 


» 


